{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12796", "text": "Genotype\n\nThe genotype is the part (DNA sequence) of the genetic makeup of a cell, and therefore of an organism or individual, which determines a specific characteristic (phenotype) of that cell/organism/individual. Genotype is one of three factors that determine phenotype, the other two being inherited epigenetic factors, and non-inherited environmental factors. DNA mutations which are acquired rather than inherited, such as cancer mutations, are not part of the individual's genotype; hence, scientists and physicians sometimes talk for example about the (geno)type of a particular cancer, that is the genotype of the disease as distinct from the diseased.\n\nAn example of how genotype determines a characteristic is petal color in a pea plant.\n\nThe genotype of an organism is the inherited map it carries within its genetic code. Not all organisms with the same genotype look or act the same way because appearance and behavior are modified by environmental and developmental conditions. Likewise, not all organisms that look alike necessarily have the same genotype.\nOne's genotype differs subtly from one's genomic sequence. A sequence is an absolute measure of base composition of an individual, or a representative of a species or group; a genotype typically implies a measurement of how an individual \"differs\" or is specialized within a group of individuals or a species. So typically, one refers to an individual's genotype with regard to a particular gene of interest and, in polyploid individuals, it refers to what combination of alleles the individual carries (see homozygous, heterozygous). The genetic constitution of an organism is referred to as its genotype, such as the letters Bb. (B - dominant genotype and b - recessive genotype)\n\nAny given gene will usually cause an observable change in an organism, known as the phenotype. The terms genotype and phenotype are distinct for at least two reasons:\n\n\nA simple example to illustrate genotype as distinct from phenotype is the flower colour in pea plants (see Gregor Mendel). There are three available genotypes, PP (homozygous dominant), Pp (heterozygous), and pp (homozygous recessive). All three have different genotypes but the first two have the same phenotype (purple) as distinct from the third (white).\nA more technical example to illustrate genotype is the single nucleotide polymorphism or SNP. A SNP occurs when corresponding sequences of DNA from different individuals differ at one DNA base, for example where the sequence AAGCCTA changes to AAGCTTA. This contains two alleles : C and T. SNPs typically have three genotypes, denoted generically AA Aa and aa. In the example above, the three genotypes would be CC, CT and TT. Other types of genetic marker, such as microsatellites, can have more than two alleles, and thus many different genotypes.\n\nThe distinaction between genotype and phenotype is commonly experienced when studying family patterns for certain hereditary diseases or conditions, for example, haemophilia. Due to the diploidy of humans (and most animals), there are two alleles for any given gene. These alleles can be the same (homozygous) or different (heterozygous), depending on the individual (see zygote). With a dominant allele, the offspring is guaranteed to inherit the trait in question irrespective of the second allele.\n\nIn the case of an albino with a recessive allele (aa), the phenotype depends upon the other allele (Aa, aA, aa or AA). An affected person mating with a heterozygous individual (Aa or aA, also carrier) there is a 50-50 chance the offspring will be albino's phenotype. If a heterozygote mates with another heterozygote, there is 75% chance passing the gene on and only a 25% chance that the gene will be displayed. A homozygous dominant (AA) individual has a normal phenotype and no risk of abnormal offspring. A homozygous recessive individual has an abnormal phenotype and is guaranteed to pass the abnormal gene onto offspring.\n\nIn the case of haemophilia, it is sex-linked thus only carried on the X chromosome. Only females can be a carrier in which the abnormality is not displayed. This woman has a normal phenotype, but runs a 50-50 chance, with an unaffected partner, of passing her abnormal gene on to her offspring. If she mated with a man with haemophilia (another carrier) there would be a 75% chance of passing on the gene.\n\n\"Genotyping\" is the process of elucidating the genotype of an individual with a biological assay. Also known as a \"genotypic assay\", techniques include PCR, DNA fragment analysis, allele specific oligonucleotide (ASO) probes, DNA sequencing, and nucleic acid hybridization to DNA microarrays or beads. Several common genotyping techniques include restriction fragment length polymorphism (\"RFLP\"), terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism (\"t-RFLP\"), amplified fragment length polymorphism (\"AFLP\"), and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (\"MLPA\").\n\nDNA fragment analysis can also be used to determine such disease causing genetics aberrations as microsatellite instability (\"MSI\"), \"trisomy\" or aneuploidy, and loss of heterozygosity (\"LOH\"). MSI and LOH in particular have been associated with cancer cell genotypes for colon, breast and cervical cancer.\n\nThe most common chromosomal aneuploidy is a trisomy of chromosome 21 which manifests itself as Down syndrome. Current technological limitations typically allow only a fraction of an individual’s genotype to be determined efficiently.\n\n\n", "id": "12796", "title": "Genotype"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12797", "text": "Gerard Hengeveld\n\nGerard Hengeveld (7 December 1910, Kampen - October 28, 2001, Bergen, North Holland) was a Dutch classical pianist, music composer and educationalist. He is especially known for his compositions of study material for piano. Other compositions include two piano concertos, a violin sonata, and a sonata for cello. Hengeveld was an able interpreter and performer of the music of Bach for piano and harpsichord. He gave regular concerts in the Concertgebouw in Amsterdam. Some of his concerts were captured on record. Hengeveld was a professor at the Royal Conservatory of The Hague. Amongst his students was Dutch pianist and musicologist Frans Bouwman. \n\nHengeveld died in 2001 at the age of 90, in Bergen.\n", "id": "12797", "title": "Gerard Hengeveld"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12798", "text": "George William, Elector of Brandenburg\n\nGeorge William (; 13 November 1595 – 1 December 1640), of the Hohenzollern dynasty, was margrave and elector of Brandenburg and duke of Prussia from 1619 until his death. His reign was marked by ineffective governance during the Thirty Years' War. He was the father of Frederick William, the \"Great Elector\".\n\nBorn in Cölln on the Spree (today part of Berlin), George William was the son of John Sigismund, Margrave of Brandenburg and Anna of Prussia. His maternal grandfather was Albert Frederick, Duke of Prussia. In 1616 George William married Elisabeth Charlotte of the Palatinate. Their only son Frederick William later became known as the \"Great Elector\". Of his two daughters, the eldest, Louise Charlotte, married Jacob Kettler, Duke of Courland, and the younger, Hedwig Sophie, married William VI, Landgrave of Hesse-Kassel.\n\nIn 1619 George William inherited the Margravate of Brandenburg and the Duchy of Prussia. He paid his feudal homage in person to the King of Poland, Sigismund III Vasa, in September 1621 in Warsaw (the Duchy of Prussia was a fief of the Kingdom of Poland at the time). The homage was renewed in 1633 after the election of a new Polish king, Władysław IV Vasa. During the Thirty Years' War, the Reformed George William tried to remain neutral between the Roman Catholic forces of the Holy Roman Empire and the Protestant principalities. As his sister Maria Eleonora of Brandenburg was queen of Sweden, George William had to maneuver between requests of assistance from his Lutheran brother-in-law King Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden and his own Protestant counsellors on one side and his Catholic chancellor Count Adam von Schwarzenberg on the other.\n\nDespite his attempts at neutrality, George William was forced by Gustavus Adolphus, since 1626 occupying Ducal Prussia's access to the sea, to join the Protestant forces in 1631. His rule was largely weak and ineffective, as much of government responsibilities in Brandenburg-Prussia was turned over to Schwarzenberg as the country suffered greatly during the war. Protestant and Catholic troops alike burned and plundered the Brandenburg region and the population was decimated there as it was throughout the German states. Whereas Ducal Prussia remained mostly untouched.\n\nWith his brother-in-law Gustavus dead in 1632, George William maintained the Swedish alliance until after the Swedish defeat at the Battle of Nördlingen on 6 September 1634. At that point, George William withdrew Brandenburg from the war and signed the Peace of Prague with Emperor Ferdinand II on 30 May 1635. Leaving Schwarzenberg in charge of the government, George William withdrew in 1637 to the relatively safe region of Ducal Prussia, where he lived in retirement until his death at Königsberg in Prussia in 1640.\n\n[aged 45]\n", "id": "12798", "title": "George William, Elector of Brandenburg"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12799", "text": "Graphic design\n\nGraphic design is the process of visual communication and problem-solving through the use of typography, photography and illustration. The field is considered a subset of visual communication and communication design, but sometimes the term \"graphic design\" is used synonymously. Graphic designers create and combine symbols, images and text to form visual representations of ideas and messages. They use typography, visual arts and page layout techniques to create visual compositions. Common uses of graphic design include corporate design (logos and branding), editorial design (magazines, newspapers and books), wayfinding or environmental design, advertising, web design, communication design, product packaging and signage.\n\nThe term graphic design was coined by William Addison Dwiggins in 1922. However, graphic design-like activities span human existence: from the caves of Lascaux, to Rome's Trajan's Column to the illuminated manuscripts of the Middle Ages, to the neon lights of Ginza, Tokyo. In \"Babylon, artisans pressed cuneiform inscriptions into clay bricks or tablets which were used for construction. The bricks gave information such as the name of the reigning monarch, the builder, or some other dignitary\". This was the first known road sign announcing the name of the governor of a state or mayor of the city. The Egyptians developed communication by hieroglyphics that used picture symbols dating as far back as 136 B.C. found on the Rosetta Stone. \"The Rosetta stone, found by one of Napoleon's engineers was an advertisement for the Egyptian ruler, Ptolemy as the \"true Son of the Sun, the Father of the Moon, and the Keeper of the Happiness of Men\"\" The Egyptians also invented papyrus, paper made from reeds found along the Nile, on which they transcribed advertisements more common among their people at the time. During the \"Dark Ages\", from 500 to 1450 , monks created elaborate, illustrated manuscripts.\n\nIn both its lengthy history and in the relatively recent explosion of visual communication in the 20th and 21st centuries, the distinction between advertising, art, graphic design and fine art has disappeared. They share many elements, theories, principles, practices, languages and sometimes the same benefactor or client. In advertising, the ultimate objective is the sale of goods and services. In graphic design, \"the essence is to give order to information, form to ideas, expression, and feeling to artifacts that document human experience.\"\n\nGraphic design in the United States began with Benjamin Franklin who used his newspaper \"The Pennsylvania Gazette\", to master the art of publicity to promote his own books and to influence the masses. \"Benjamin Franklin's ingenuity gained in strength as did his cunning and in 1737 he had replaced his counterpart in Pennsylvania, Andrew Bradford as postmaster and printer after a competition he instituted and won. He showed his prowess by running an ad in his \"General Magazine and the Historical Chronicle of British Plantations in America\" (the precursor to the Saturday Evening Post) that stressed the benefits offered by a stove he invented, named called the \"Pennsylvania Fireplace\". His invention is still sold today and is known as \"the Franklin stove\". \" \n\nAmerican advertising initially imitated British newspapers and magazines. Advertisements were printed in scrambled type and uneven lines that made it difficult to read. Franklin better organized this by adding 14-point type for the first line of the advertisement; although later shortened and centered it, making \"headlines\". Franklin added illustrations, something that London printers had not attempted. Franklin was the first to utilize logos, which were early symbols that announced such services as opticians by displaying golden spectacles. Franklin taught advertisers that the use of detail was important in marketing their products. Some advertisements ran for 10-20 lines, including color, names, varieties, and sizes of the goods that were offered.\n\nDuring the Tang Dynasty (618–907) wood blocks were cut to print on textiles and later to reproduce Buddhist texts. A Buddhist scripture printed in 868 is the earliest known printed book. Beginning in the 11th century, longer scrolls and books were produced using movable type printing, making books widely available during the Song dynasty (960–1279).\n\nDuring the 17th-18th century movable type was used for handbills or trade cards which were printed from wood or copper engravings. These documents announced a business and its location. English painter William Hogarth used his skill in engraving was one of the first to design for business trade.\n\nIn Mainz Germany, in 1448, Johann Gutenberg introduced movable type using a new metal alloy for use in a printing press and opened a new era of commerce. Previously, most advertising was word of mouth. In France and England, for example, criers announced products for sale just as ancient Romans had done. \n\nThe printing press made books more widely available. Aldus Manutius developed the book structure that became the foundation of western publication design. This era of graphic design is called Humanist or Old Style. Additionally, William Caxton, England's first printer produced religious books, but had trouble selling them. He discovered the use of leftover pages and used them to announce the books and post them on church doors. This practice was termed \"\"squis\"\" or \"\"pin up\" posters,\" in approximately 1612, becoming the first form of print advertising in Europe\".\" The term \"Siquis\" came from the Roman era when public notices were posted stating \"\"if anybody...\"\", which is Latin for \"\"si quis\"\". These printed announcements were followed by later public registers of \"wants\" called \"want ads\" and in some areas such as the first periodical in Paris advertising was termed \"advices\". The \"Advices\" were what we know today as \"want ad media\" or \"advice columns\".\n\nIn 1638 Harvard University received a printing press from England. More than 52 years passed before London bookseller Benjamin Harris received another printing press in Boston. Harris published a newspaper in serial form, \"'Publick Occurrences Both Foreign and Domestick'\". It was four pages long and suppressed by the government after its first edition.\n\nJohn Campbell is credited for the first newspaper, the \"'Boston News-Letter'\", which appeared in 1704. The paper was known during the revolution as \"\"Weeklies\"\". The name came from the 13 hours required for the ink to dry on each side of the paper. \"'The solution was to first, print the ads and then to print the news on the other side the day before publication. The paper was four pages long having ads on at least 20%-30% of the total paper, (pages one and four) the hot news was located on the inside.\"' The initial use of the \"Boston News-Letter\" carried Campbell's own solicitations for advertising from his readers. Campbell's first paid advertisement was in his third edition, May 7 or 8th, 1704. Two of the first ads were for stolen anvils. The third was for real estate in Oyster Bay, owned by William Bradford, a pioneer printer in New York, and the first to sell something of value. Bradford published his first newspaper in 1725, New York's first, The New York Gazette. Bradford's son preceded him in Philadelphia publishing the \"American Weekly Mercury\", 1719. \"The Mercury\" and William Brooker's \"Massachusetts Gazette\", first published a day earlier.\n\nIn late 19th-century Europe, especially in the United Kingdom, the first official publication of a printed design was released, marking the separation of graphic design from fine art.\n\nIn 1849, Henry Cole became one of the major forces in design education in Great Britain, informing the government of the importance of design in his \"Journal of Design and Manufactures\". He organized the Great Exhibition as a celebration of modern industrial technology and Victorian design.\n\nFrom 1891 to 1896, William Morris' Kelmscott Press published some of the most significant of the graphic design products of the Arts and Crafts movement, and made a lucrative business of creating and selling stylish books. Morris created a market for works of graphic design in their own right and a profession for this new type of art. The Kelmscott Press is characterized by an obsession with historical styles. This historicism was the first significant reaction to the state of nineteenth-century graphic design. Morris' work, along with the rest of the Private Press movement, directly influenced Art Nouveau.\n\nThe term \"graphic design\" first appeared in print in the 1922 essay \"New Kind of Printing Calls for New Design\" by William Addison Dwiggins, an American book designer in the early 20th century. Raffe's \"Graphic Design\", published in 1927, was the first book to use \"Graphic Design\" in its title.\n\nThe signage in the London Underground is a classic design example of the modern era and used a typeface designed by Edward Johnston in 1916.\n\nIn the 1920s, Soviet constructivism applied 'intellectual production' in different spheres of production. The movement saw individualistic art as useless in revolutionary Russia and thus moved towards creating objects for utilitarian purposes. They designed buildings, theater sets, posters, fabrics, clothing, furniture, logos, menus, etc.\n\nJan Tschichold codified the principles of modern typography in his 1928 book, \"New Typography\". He later repudiated the philosophy he espoused in this book as fascistic, but it remained influential. Tschichold, Bauhaus typographers such as Herbert Bayer and László Moholy-Nagy and El Lissitzky greatly influenced graphic design. They pioneered production techniques and stylistic devices used throughout the twentieth century. The following years saw graphic design in the modern style gain widespread acceptance and application. The post-World War II American economy revealed a greater need for graphic design, mainly in advertising and packaging. The spread of the German Bauhaus school of design to Chicago in 1937 brought a \"mass-produced\" minimalism to America; sparking \"modern\" architecture and design. Notable names in mid-century modern design include Adrian Frutiger, designer of the typefaces Univers and Frutiger; Paul Rand, who took the principles of the Bauhaus and applied them to popular advertising and logo design, helping to create a uniquely American approach to European minimalism while becoming one of the principal pioneers of the subset of graphic design known as corporate identity; and Josef Müller-Brockmann, who designed posters in a severe yet accessible manner typical of the 1950s and 1970s era.\n\nThe professional graphic design industry grew in parallel with consumerism. This raised concerns and criticisms, notably from within the graphic design community with the First Things First manifesto. First launched by Ken Garland in 1964, it was re-published as the First Things First 2000 manifesto in 1999 in the magazine \"Emigre\" 51 stating \"We propose a reversal of priorities in favor of more useful, lasting and democratic forms of communication - a mindshift away from product marketing and toward the exploration and production of a new kind of meaning. The scope of debate is shrinking; it must expand. Consumerism is running uncontested; it must be challenged by other perspectives expressed, in part, through the visual languages and resources of design.\" Both editions attracted signatures from practitioners and thinkers such as Rudy VanderLans, Erik Spiekermann, Ellen Lupton and Rick Poynor. The 2000 manifesto was also published in Adbusters, known for its strong critiques of visual culture.\n\nGraphic design is applied to everything visual, from road signs to technical schematics, from interoffice memorandums to reference manuals. \n\nDesign can aid in selling a product or idea. It is applied to products and elements of company identity such as logos, colors, packaging and text as part of branding (see also advertising). Branding has increasingly become important in the range of services offered by graphic designers. Graphic designers often form part of a branding team. \n\nTextbooks are designed to present subjects such as geography, science and math. These publications have layouts that illustrate theories and diagrams. Graphic design also applied to layout, formatting, illustrations and charts.\n\nGraphic design is applied in the entertainment industry in decoration, scenery and visual story telling. Other examples of design for entertainment purposes include novels, comic books, DVD covers, opening credits and closing credits in filmmaking, and programs and props on stage. This could also include artwork used for T-shirts and other items screenprinted for sale.\n\nFrom scientific journals to news reporting, the presentation of opinion and facts is often improved with graphics and thoughtful compositions of visual information - known as information design. Newspapers, magazines, blogs, television and film documentaries may use graphic design. With the advent of the web, information designers with experience in interactive tools are increasingly used to illustrate the background to news stories.\n\nA graphic design project may involve the stylization and presentation of existing text and either preexisting imagery or images developed by the graphic designer. Elements can be incorporated in both traditional and digital form, which involves the use of visual arts, typography, and page layout techniques. Graphic designers organize pages and optionally add graphic elements. Graphic designers can commission photographers or illustrators to create original pieces. Designers use digital tools, often referred to as interactive design, or multimedia design. Designers need communication skills to convince an audience and sell their designs. \n\nThe \"process school\" is concerned with communication; it highlights the channels and media through which messages are transmitted and by which senders and receivers encode and decode these message. The semiotic school treats a message as a construction of signs which through interaction with receivers, produces meaning; communication as an agent.\n\nTypography includes type design, modifying type glyphs and arranging type. Type glyphs (characters) are created and modified using illustration techniques. Type arrangement is the selection of typefaces, point size, tracking (the space between all characters used), kerning (the space between two specific characters) and leading (line spacing).\n\nTypography is performed by typesetters, compositors, typographers, graphic artists, art directors and clerical workers. Until the digital age, typography was a specialized occupation.\n\nPage layout deals with the arrangement of elements (content) on a page, such as image placement, text layout and style. Page design has always been a consideration in printed material and more recently extended to displays such as web pages. Elements typically consist of type (text), images (pictures), and (with print media) occasionally place-holder graphics for elements that are not printed with ink such as die/laser cutting, foil stamping or blind embossing.\n\nPrintmaking is the process of making artworks by printing on paper and other materials or surfaces. The process is capable of producing multiples of the same work, each called a print. Each print is an original, technically known as an impression. Prints are created from a single original surface, technically a matrix. Common types of matrices include: plates of metal, usually copper or zinc for engraving or etching; stone, used for lithography; blocks of wood for woodcuts, linoleum for linocuts and fabric plates for screen-printing. Works printed from a single plate create an edition, in modern times usually each signed and numbered to form a limited edition. Prints may be published in book form, as artist's books. A single print could be the product of one or multiple techniques.\n\nAside from technology, graphic design requires judgment and creativity. Critical, observational, quantitative and analytic thinking are required for design layouts and rendering. If the executor is merely following a solution (e.g. sketch, script or instructions) provided by another designer (such as an art director), then the executor is not usually considered the designer.\n\nThe method of presentation (e.g. arrangement, style, medium) is important to the design. The development and presentation tools can change how an audience perceives a project. The image or layout is produced using traditional media and guides, or digital image editing tools on computers. Tools in computer graphics often take on traditional names such as \"scissors\" or \"pen\". Some graphic design tools such as a grid are used in both traditional and digital form.\n\nIn the mid-1980s desktop publishing and graphic art software applications introduced computer image manipulation and creation capabilities that had previously been manually executed. Computers enabled designers to instantly see the effects of layout or typographic changes, and to simulate the effects of traditional media. Traditional tools such as pencils can be useful even when computers are used for finalization; a designer or art director may sketch numerous concepts as part of the creative process. Styluses can be used with tablet computers to capture hand drawings digitally. \n\nSome designers dispute that computers enhance the creative process. Computers allow designers to explore multiple ideas quickly and in more detail than can be achieved by hand-rendering or paste-up. However, some designers find the limitless choices from digital design lead to paralysis or to endless iterations with no clear outcome.\n\nHand-rendered layouts can be used to get approval for an idea execution before a designer invests time to produce finished visuals. Then the idea is finished on the computer in a hybrid process. \n\nNearly all of the popular and \"industry standard\" software programs used for graphic design since the early 1990s are products of Adobe Systems Incorporated. Adobe Photoshop (a raster-based program for photo editing) and Adobe Illustrator (a vector-based program for drawing) are often used in the final stage. Designers often use pre-designed raster images and vector graphics in their work from online design databases. Raster images may be edited in Adobe Photoshop, logos and illustrations in Adobe Illustrator, and the final product assembled in one of the major page layout programs, including Adobe InDesign. Graphic designers are expected to be proficient in these programs.\n\nSince the advent of personal computers, many graphic designers have become involved in interface design, in an environment commonly referred to as a Graphical User Interface (GUI). This has included web design and software design, when end user interactivity is a design consideration of the layout or interface. Combining visual communication skills with an understanding of user interaction and online branding, graphic designers often work with software developers and web developers to create the look and feel of a web site or software application. An important aspect of interface design is icon design.\n\nUser experience design considers how a user interacts with and responds to an interface, service or product.\n\nExperiential graphic design is the application of communication skills to the built environment. This area of graphic design requires practitioners to understand physical installations that have to be manufactured and withstand the same environmental conditions as buildings. As such, it is a cross-disciplinary collaborative process involving designers, fabricators, city planners, architects, manufacturers and construction teams.\n\nExperiential graphic designers try to solve problems that people encounter while interacting with buildings and space. Examples of practice areas for environmental graphic designers are wayfinding, placemaking, branded environments, exhibitions and museum displays, public installations and digital environments.\n\nGraphic design career paths cover all parts of the creative spectrum and often overlap. Workers perform specialized tasks, such as design services, publishing, advertising and public relations. As of 2016 median pay was $53,316 per year. The main job titles within the industry are often country specific. They can include graphic designer, art director, creative director, animator and entry level production artist. Depending on the industry served, the responsibilities may have different titles such as \"DTP Associate\" or \"Graphic Artist\". The responsibilities may involve specialized skills such as illustration, photography, animation or interactive design. \n\nEmployment in design of online projects was expected to increase by 35%, while traditional designs, such as publications, faced slower rates of 16% or less.\n\nGraphic designers can work within companies devoted specifically to the industry, such as design consultancies or branding agencies, others may work within publishing, marketing or other communications companies. Especially since the introduction of personal computers, many graphic designers work as in-house designers in non-design oriented organizations. Graphic designers may also work freelance, working on their own terms, prices, ideas, etc.\n\nA graphic designer typically reports to the art director, creative director or senior media creative. As a designer becomes more senior, they spend less time designing and more time leading and directing other designers on broader creative activities, such as brand development and corporate identity development. They are often expected to interact more directly with clients, for example taking and interpreting briefs.\n\nJeff Howe of \"Wired Magazine\" first used the term \"crowdsourcing\" in his 2006 article, \"The Rise of Crowdsourcing.\" It spans such creative domains as graphic design, architecture, apparel design, writing, illustration etc. Tasks may be assigned to individuals or a group and may be categorized as convergent or divergent. An example of a divergent task is generating alternative designs for a poster. An example of a convergent task is selecting one poster design.\n\n\n", "id": "12799", "title": "Graphic design"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12800", "text": "Great Rift Valley\n\nThe Great Rift Valley is a name given to the continuous geographic trench, approximately in length, that runs from Lebanon's Beqaa Valley in Asia to Mozambique in South Eastern Africa. The name continues in some usages, although it is today considered geologically imprecise as it combines features that are today regarded as separate, although related, rift and fault systems.\n\nToday, the term is most often used to refer to the valley of the East African Rift, the divergent plate boundary which extends from the Afar Triple Junction southward across eastern Africa, and is in the process of splitting the African Plate into two new separate plates. Geologists generally refer to these incipient plates as the Nubian Plate and the Somali Plate.\n\nThe Great Rift Valley as originally described was thought to extend from Lebanon in the north to Mozambique in the south, where it constitutes one of two distinct physiographic provinces of the East African mountains. It included what we would call today the Lebanese section of the Dead Sea Transform, the Jordan Rift Valley, Red Sea Rift and the East African Rift.\n\nToday these rifts and faults are seen as distinct, although connected. These were only formed 35 million years ago.\n\nThe northernmost part of the Rift corresponds to the central section of what is called today the Dead Sea Transform (DST) or Rift. This midsection of the DST forms the Beqaa Valley in Lebanon, separating the Lebanon from the Anti-Lebanon Mountains. Further south it is known as the Hula Valley separating the Galilee mountains and the Golan Heights.\n\nThe River Jordan begins here and flows southward through Lake Hula into the Sea of Galilee in Israel. The Rift then continues south through the Jordan Rift Valley into the Dead Sea on the Israeli-Jordanian border. From the Dead Sea southwards, the Rift is occupied by the Wadi Arabah, then the Gulf of Aqaba, and then the Red Sea.\n\nOff the southern tip of Sinai in the Red Sea, the Dead Sea Transform meets the Red Sea Rift which runs the length of the Red Sea. The Red Sea Rift comes ashore to meet the East African Rift and the Aden Ridge in the Afar Depression of East Africa. The junction of these three rifts is called the Afar Triple Junction.\n\n The East African rift has two branches, the Western Rift Valley and the Eastern Rift Valley.\n\nThe Western Rift, also called the Albertine Rift, is bordered by some of the highest mountains in Africa, including the Virunga Mountains, Mitumba Mountains, and Ruwenzori Range. It contains the Rift Valley lakes, which include some of the deepest lakes in the world (up to deep at Lake Tanganyika).\n\nMuch of this area lies within the boundaries of national parks such as Virunga National Park in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Rwenzori National Park and Queen Elizabeth National Park in Uganda, and Volcanoes National Park in Rwanda. Lake Victoria is considered to be part of the rift valley system although it actually lies between the two branches. All of the African Great Lakes were formed as the result of the rift, and most lie within its rift valley.\n\nIn Kenya, the valley is deepest to the north of Nairobi. As the lakes in the Eastern Rift have no outlet to the sea and tend to be shallow, they have a high mineral content as the evaporation of water leaves the salts behind. For example, Lake Magadi has high concentrations of soda (sodium carbonate) and Lake Elmenteita, Lake Bogoria, and Lake Nakuru are all strongly alkaline, while the freshwater springs supplying Lake Naivasha are essential to support its current biological variety.\n\nThe southern section of the Rift Valley includes Lake Malawi, the third deepest freshwater body in the world, reaching 706 m in depth and separating the Nyassa plateau of Northern Mozambique from Malawi; it ends in the Zambesi valley.\n\n\n\n", "id": "12800", "title": "Great Rift Valley"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12804", "text": "Grigori Rasputin\n\nGrigori Yefimovich Rasputin (; ) was a Russian peasant, an experienced traveler, a mystical faith healer, and trusted friend of the family of Nicholas II, the last Tsar of the Russian Empire. He became an influential figure in Saint Petersburg, especially after August 1915 when Nicholas took command of the army fighting in World War I. Advising his wife, Alexandra Feodorovna, in countless spiritual and political issues, Rasputin became an easy scapegoat for Russian nationalists, liberals and aristocrats.\n\nThere is uncertainty over much of Rasputin's life and the degree of influence that he exerted over the extremely shy Tsar and the strong-willed Tsarina. Accounts are often based on dubious memoirs, hearsay, and legend. While his influence and position may have been exaggerated by society gossip and his own drunken boasting his presence played a significant role in the increasing unpopularity of the Imperial couple. Rasputin was murdered by monarchists who hoped to save Tsarism by ending his sway over the royal family.\n\nGrigori Rasputin was born the son of a well-to-do peasant and postal coachdriver (\"yamshchik\") in the small village of Pokrovskoe, in the Tobolsk Governorate (now Yarkovsky District in the Tyumen Oblast) in the immense West Siberian Plain. The parish register contains the following entry for 9 January 1869 [O.S.]: \"In the village of Pokrovskoe, in the family of the peasant Yefim Yakovlevich Rasputin and his wife, both Orthodox, was born a son, Grigory.\" The next day, he was baptized and named after St. Gregory of Nyssa, whose feast day is on 10 January.\n\nGrigori was the fifth of nine children, perhaps the only who survived. He never attended school, as there was not one in the area. (The first Russian Empire Census in 1897, registered 87.5 per cent of the Siberian population as illiterate.) In Pokrovskoe, a village with 200 dwellings and roughly thousand inhabitants, Grigori was regarded as an outsider, but one endowed with mysterious gifts. In those days, Rasputin acquired a reputation as a brawler and a libertine. Having a rude attitude towards the district head, he was locked up in jail for two nights; according to D. Smith this is the only mention of Rasputin's criminal past.\n\nOn 2 February 1887, Rasputin married Praskovia Fyodorovna Dubrovina (1865/6–1936) and they had three children: Dmitri, Matryona, and Varvara. Two earlier sons and a daughter died young. In 1892, but according to D. Smith in 1897 Rasputin left his village, his wife, children and parents and spent several months in a monastery in Verkhoturye. Alexander Spiridovich suggested after the death of a child. May be Rasputin was curious as the monastery was enlarged to receive more pilgrims. Outside the monastery lived starets Makary, a hermit, whose influence led him to give up tobacco, alcohol, and meat. When he returned to the village, he had become a fervent and inspired convert. His children dreaded the long hours of enforced prayer and fasting \"for which everything, anniversaries or penitence, served as an excuse.\"\n\nRasputin's claimed vision of Our Lady of Kazan turned him towards the life of a religious mystic. Around 1897, he travelled to Mount Athos (St. Panteleimon Monastery), but left shocked and profoundly disillusioned, confronted with sodomy as he told Makary. By 1900, Rasputin was identified as a \"strannik\", a religious wanderer, visiting holy places on foot and exchanging teaching for hospitality. However, he usually went home to help his family for sowing and the harvest. He is sometimes considered a \"yurodiviy\" (\"holy fool\"), and a \"starets\" (\"elder\"), but he did not consider himself a starets, as these lived in seclusion and silence. To label him as a yurodiviy is problematic, as Rasputin was often described as rather intelligent.\n\nAccording to Oleg Platonov, Rasputin criticized the local priest who had a mechanical way of praying. In 1902, private gatherings in his house had to be abandoned because of all the attention that he was receiving from locals. Rasputin decided to spend some time in Kiev, almost 3,000 km (1,860 miles) from his village, where he visited the Monastery of the Caves. In Kazan, he attracted the attention of the bishop and members of the upper class. His interpretations of the Scriptures were so keen and so original that even learned churchmen liked to listen to them.\nRasputin then travelled to the capital to meet with John of Kronstadt and acquire donations for the construction of the village church. He carried an introduction to Ivan Stragorodsky, the rector of the theological faculty.\n\nSpiridovich thinks that Rasputin arrived in St Petersburg in the middle of 1904; according to Sukhomlinov, he met with the tsarina when she was still pregnant. Rasputin went to Alexander Nevsky Lavra to seek sustenance and lodgings. Theophanes of Poltava was amazed by his tenacious memory and psychological perspicacity, and he offered to allow Rasputin to live in his apartment. Either he or Countess Sophia Ignatieva introduced Rasputin to Milica of Montenegro and her sister Anastasia, who were interested in Persian mysticism, spiritism, and occultism. On 1 November 1905, Milica presented Rasputin to Tsar Nicholas and his wife Alexandra who had settled in Peterhof Palace because of all the unrest in the capital.\n\nPrior to his meeting with Rasputin, the Tsar had to deal with the Russo-Japanese War, Bloody Sunday, the Revolution of 1905, bombs, and a ten-day general strike in October. In a city without light, street cars, and railway connections, the \"Emperor and Autocrat of All the Russias\" was willing to sign the October Manifesto, to agree with a constitution and the establishment of the Imperial Duma. He gave up part of his unlimited autocracy and for the next six months, Sergei Witte, a reformist, was the first Russian Prime Minister. By the end of the year, the real ruler of the country was Dmitri Trepov because of continuing bloody fighting against police and soldiers in the streets. In April 1906, when Witte was succeeded by the conservative Ivan Goremykin and the Russian Constitution of 1906 was introduced, the Tsar, regretting his 'moment of weakness', retained the title of autocrat and maintained his unique dominating position in relation to the Russian Church.\n\nOn 13 October 1906, Rasputin paid a visit to the Imperial family and presented an icon. On request of the Tsar, he visited the next prime minister, Pyotr Stolypin. A few weeks before, 29 people had been killed on Aptekarsky Island in a bomb attack by the Maximalists and two of Stolypin's children were wounded. Rasputin was invited to pray.\nOn 6 April 1907, Rasputin was invited to Alexander Palace in Tsarskoe Selo, this time to see Tsesarevich Alexei, the heir. The boy had suffered an injury which caused him painful bleeding. By then, it was not known that Alexei had a rare form of hemophilia, a disorder due to the lack of just one protein. The doctors could not supply a cure, and the desperate Tsarina invited Rasputin. He was able to calm the parents and their son, standing at the foot of the bed and praying. From that moment, Alexandra believed Rasputin was Alexei's savior.\n\nPierre Gilliard, the French historian Hélène Carrère d'Encausse, and journalist Diarmuid Jeffreys speculated that Rasputin's healing practice included halting the administration of aspirin, a pain-relieving analgesic available since 1899. Aspirin is an antiaggregant and has blood-thinning properties; the mechanism of action of aspirin is that it prevents clotting and promotes bleeding, which could have caused the hemarthrosis at the root of Alexei's joints swelling and pain.\n\nIn September 1912, the Romanovs were visiting their hunting retreat in the Białowieża Forest; on 5 September, the careless Tsesarevich jumped into a rowboat and hit one of the oarlocks. A large bruise appeared within minutes. Within a week the hematoma reduced in size. In mid-September, the family moved to Spała (then in Russian Poland). On 2 October, after a drive in the woods, the \"juddering of the carriage had caused still healing hematoma in his upper thigh to rupture and start bleeding again.\" Alexei had to be carried out in an almost unconscious state. His temperature rose and his heartbeat dropped, caused by a swelling in the left groin; Alexandra barely left his bedside. A constant record was kept of the boy's temperature. On 10 October, a medical bulletin appeared in the newspapers, and Alexei received the last sacrament. His condition improved at once, according to the Tsar. The positive trend continued throughout the next day. According to Nelipa, Robert K. Massie was correct to recommend that psychological factors do play a part.\n\nIt is not exactly clear on which day, either 9, 10, or 11 October, the Tsarina turned to her lady-in-waiting and best friend, Anna Vyrubova, to secure the help of the peasant healer, who at that time was out of favor. According to his daughter, Rasputin received the telegram on 12 October. If Maria Rasputin was right about the day, the telegram was sent \"the longstanding claim that Rasputin had somehow alleviated Alexei's condition is simply fictitious\", according to Nelipa. The next day he seems to have responded, with a short telegram, including the prophecy: \"The little one will not die. Do not allow the doctors [c.q. Eugene Botkin and Vladimir Derevenko] to bother him too much.\" On 19 October, Alexei's condition was considerably better and the hematoma disappeared, but he had to undergo orthopedic therapy to straighten his left leg.\n\nThe court physician, Botkin, believed that Rasputin was a charlatan and his apparent healing powers arose from his use of hypnosis, but Rasputin was not interested in this practice before 1913 and his teacher Gerasim Papnadato was expelled from St. Petersburg in 1914. Felix Yusupov, one of Rasputin's enemies, suggested that he secretly drugged Alexei with Tibetan herbs which he had obtained from a \"quack doctor\", Peter Badmayev, but his three envelopes with powder were politely rejected by the court. For Fuhrmann, these ideas on hypnosis and drugs flourished because the imperial family lived such isolated lives. (Since the Revolution of 1905 they lived almost as much apart from Russian society as if they were settlers in Canada.) For Moynahan, \"There is no evidence that Rasputin ever summoned up spirits, or felt the need to; he won his admirers through force of personality, not by tricks.\" For Maria Rasputin and Vladimir Sukhomlinov, it was magnetism. For Shelley, the secret of his power lay in the sense of calm, gentle strength, and shining warmth of conviction.\n\nEven before Rasputin's arrival, the upper class of St Petersburg had been widely influenced by mysticism. Individual aristocrats were obsessed with anything occult. In those days, Imperial Russia was confronted with a religious renaissance, a widespread interest in spiritual-ethical literature and non-conformist moral-spiritual movements, an upsurge in pilgrimage and other devotions to sacred spaces and objects. The \"God-Seeking\" were shaping their own ritual and spiritual lives (e.g. Helena Blavatsky, George Gurdjieff, and Pyotr Ouspensky).\n\nAlexandra worried a lot about herself, her son and his condition; she had invited her physician 42 times within two months. Earlier Papus had visited Russia three times, in 1901, 1905, and 1906, serving the Tsar and Tsarina both as physician and occult consultant. After the healer Nizier Anthelme Philippe died, Rasputin came into the picture.\n\nIn his religious views, Rasputin was close to the so-called Khlysts, an obscure Christian sect with strong Siberian roots, who affirmed \"the existence of a perpetual warfare between flesh and spirit\" and who called themselves \"Men of God\". In September 1907, the 'Spiritual Consistory' of Tobolsk accused Rasputin of spreading false doctrines: kissing and bathing with women. (Rasputin usually welcomed his female followers with a kiss, even if he saw them for the first time.) According to Oleg Platonov: \"The case was fabricated so clumsily that it ‘works’ only against its own authors. No wonder the documents were never published. Nothing but allusions were made to its existence.\" In Summer 1908, Theofan traveled to Siberia and examined all the documents from the Tobolsk inquiry, but failed to find anything of interest.\n\nWhile fascinated by Rasputin in the beginning, the ruling class of St Petersburg began to turn against him as he had privileges no one else had, an easy access to the Imperial Family. It seems Rasputin \"knew how to amuse and enliven the little boy\". On 8 December 1908, Rasputin brought his wife to Tsarkoe Selo. In 1909, within four months, Rasputin had visited the Romanovs six times. Alexandra was in conflict with her mother- and sister-in-law about her continuing patronage of Rasputin. In 1910, the press started a campaign against Rasputin. Nikolai Pavlovich Sablin and Charles Sydney Gibbes were sent to Rasputin to find out more. Theofan lost his interest and Stolypin wanted to ban him from the capital. When Rasputin arrived in St Petersburg, he returned within three weeks to his home village, according to Spiridovich.\n\nEarly 1911, the Tsar instructed Rasputin to join a group of pilgrims. Rasputin first visited the Pochayiv Lavra in the Ukraine. From Odessa, the pilgrims sailed to Constantinople, Smyrna, Ephesus, Patmos, Rhodes, Cyprus, Beirut, Tripoli, and Jaffa. Around Lent 1911, Rasputin arrived in Jerusalem and the Holy Land. On his way back, he visited his right-wing friend Iliodor who gathered huge crowds in Tsaritsyn. When Vladimir Kokovtsov became prime minister, he asked the Tsar permission to authorize Rasputin's exile to Tobolsk, but Nicholas refused. \"I know Rasputin too well to believe all the tittle-tattle about him.\"\n\nIn 1912, Hermogen, who told Rasputin to stay away from the palace, repeated the rumours that Rasputin had joined the Khlysty. Iliodor, hinting that Rasputin was Alexandra's paramour, showed Makarov a satchel of letters, one by the Tsarina and four by her daughters written in 1909 and 1910. The given or stolen letters were handed by Kokovtsov to the Tsar, but using a hectograph the content was spread through the capital. Kokovtsov offered Rasputin 200,000 rubles, equaling $100,000, to leave the capital. He also ordered the newspapers not to mention Rasputin's name in connection with the Empress. Rasputin had become one of the most hated people in Russia. \n\nThere is little or no proof that Rasputin was a member of the Khlysty, but he does appear to have been influenced by their practices, accepting some of their beliefs, for example, those regarding sin as a necessary part of redemption. Suspicions that Rasputin, a good dancer, was one of the Khlysty tarnished his reputation right until the end of his life. The Holy Synod frequently attacked Rasputin, accusing him of a variety of immoral or evil practices. Finally, Nicholas II accepted investigations on Rasputin. The new bishop in Tobolsk, Alexey V. Molchanov, started to investigate the case on 1 September 1912. Two months later the bishop concluded Rasputin was an \"orthodox Christian ... who sought the truth\" and the investigations were stopped. After the Spała incident, Rasputin regained influence at court and also in church affairs.\n\nOn 21 February 1913, Rodzianko ejected Rasputin from the Cathedral of Our Lady of Kazan shortly before the celebration of 300 years of Romanov rule in Russia. He had established himself in front of the seats which Rodzianko, after great difficulty, had secured for the Duma. Rasputin's behaviour was discussed in the Fourth Duma, and in March 1913, the Octobrists, led by Alexander Guchkov, commissioned an investigation, but \"anyone bold enough to criticize Rasputin found only condemnation from the Tsarina.\" The emperor and his wife referred to Rasputin as Grigori, our \"Friend\" or \"holy man\", avoiding his last name. Worried about the threat of a scandal, the Tsar asked Rasputin to leave for Siberia; but a few days later, at the demand of the Empress, the order was cancelled. Nicholas decided to criticize the politicians. The Tsar dismissed Kokovtsov on 29 January 1914. He was replaced by the decrepit and absent-minded Ivan Goremykin, and Pyotr Bark as Minister of Finance. \n\nAccording to Pavel Milyukov, in May 1914, Rasputin had become an influential factor in Russian politics.\n\nOn 27/28 June, Rasputin arrived from the capital in Pokrovskoe.\nAround 3:00 pm on Sunday , Rasputin went out from the house, accompanied by the son of the postal and telegraphic office, in reply to a telegram he had received from the Tsarina on the threat of war. At that moment, he was suddenly approached by what looked like a beggar. When Rasputin was checking his pockets for money, this woman, the 33-years old Khionia Guseva who had her face concealed with a black kerchief, pulled out a dagger. She stabbed Rasputin in the stomach, just above the navel. Rasputin asserted that he ran down the street with his hands on his belly. Guseva claimed that she chased him, but Rasputin grabbed a stick from the ground and hit her. Covered with blood, Rasputin was brought into his house. A doctor from a neighboring village gave first aid. The next day, Alexandr Vladimirov arrived from Tyumen and assessed the mesentery was scraped.\n\nOn Thursday, Rasputin was transported by steamboat to Tyumen, accompanied by his wife and daughter. The Tsarina sent her own physician, Roman Vreden and after a laparotomy and more than six weeks in the hospital, where he had to walk around in a gown, unable to wear ordinary clothes, Rasputin recovered. On 17 August, he left the hospital; by mid-September he was back in Petrograd. His daughter Maria records that Rasputin believed that Iliodor and Vladimir Dzhunkovsky had organized the attack. According to her, Rasputin was never the same man afterwards and started to drink dessert wines. (N.B. Since the beginning of the war, the manufacture, and sale of vodka was forbidden. It is likely Rasputin drank sweet or semi-sweet Crimean or Georgian wine.)\n\nA few days after the attack, Iliodor, dressed as a woman, fled all the way around the Gulf of Bothnia to Christiania. Guseva, a fanatically religious woman who had been his adherent in earlier years, \"denied Iliodor's participation, declaring that she attempted to kill Rasputin because he was spreading temptation among the innocent.\" On 12 October 1914, the investigator declared that Iliodor was guilty of inciting the murder, but the local procurator decided to suspend any action against him for undisclosed reasons. Guseva was locked in a madhouse in Tomsk and a trial was avoided.\n\nThe Tsar ordered to take measures to protect Rasputin's life.\n\nFrom October 1914, Stepan Petrovich Beletsky, head of the police, exercised 24-hour surveillance of Rasputin and his apartment. Two sets of detectives were attached to his person; one was to act undercover. From 1 January 1915 modified reports from Okhrana spies — the \"staircase notes\" — had to provide evidence about Rasputin's lifestyle. They were given to the Tsar in an attempt to convince him to break with Rasputin. In reading it, the Tsar observed that on the day and hour at which one of the acts mentioned in the document was alleged to have taken place, Rasputin had actually been in Tsarskoe Selo.\n\nOn 25 March 1915, Rasputin left for Moscow by nighttrain. On the next day, he was followed by eight Okhrana policemen. On the evening, he is said, while inebriated, to have opened his trousers and waved his \"reproductive organ\" in front of a group of female gypsy singers in the Yar restaurant. According to Smith in the original police report, there is \"not one word about Rasputin being drunk, about any insulted Gypsy chorus girls, about indecent language, public exhibitionism, and most critically, about any arrest.\" They were celebrating a business deal and had invited two journalists. A few days later a waiter assessed the story as bunkum when talking to Gerard Shelley. An unreliable report was presented in June; the police did not interview any singer or witness in the restaurant. \nThe footballer and secret agent R. H. Bruce Lockhart mentioned he saw everything with his own eyes; Smith proves he lied. The incident did not happen in Summer, and in April Lockhart stayed in Kiev. Also for Bernard Pares, it was taken that the police were the enemies of Rasputin, and that the many stories which reached the public were simply their fabrications.\n\nAfter the First Balkan War, the Balkan allies planned the partition of the European territory of the Ottoman Empire among them. During the Second Balkan War, the Tsar tried to stop the conflict since Russia did not wish to lose either of its Slavic allies. Rasputin warned the Tsar not to become involved and promoted a peaceful policy in the \"Petersburg Gazette\". Rasputin became the enemy of Grand Duke Nicholas, a panslavist, his brother Peter and their wives Milica and Anastasia of Montenegro, eager to go to war and push the Austrians out of the Balkans.\n\nThe Austrian-Hungarian government decided on 14 July 1914 (N.S.) to send an ultimatum to Serbia. On , the Tsar received a formal appeal for help from the Serbs, the beginning of the July Crisis. The Council of Ministers decreed war preparations starting on the next day, and partial mobilisation as a precaution against the Austro-Hungarian Empire to support the Kingdom of Serbia. On the 26th, Rasputin spoke out against Russia going to war; he begged the Tsar to do everything in his power to avoid it. On the 27th, Anna Vyrubova asked Rasputin to change his mind on the war, but he stuck to his position. On the 28th, Austria declared war on Serbia, leading to a partial mobilization of Russia. In the morning of the 29th, the wavering Tsar signed both a partial against Austria and a general mobilization with Austria and Germany. From the hospital, Rasputin sent several telegrams to the court through Vyrubova, expressing his fears for the future of the country. \"If Russia goes to war, it will be the end of the monarchy, of the Romanovs and of Russian institutions.\" \"Such was his worry that his wound opened up and began to bleed again.\"\n\nA flurry of telegrams between the Kaiser Wilhelm II and the Tsar led to the cancellation of Russian general mobilization; the Tsar chose a partial mobilization in the evening. As it would make a rapid general mobilization impossible, Nicholas II met with protests from Foreign Minister Sergei Sazonov. According to Samuel Hoare: \"I believe myself that, had he not insisted upon general mobilisation on July 30th, the Emperor would have continued to hesitate, and Russian mobilisation … would never have been possible\". On the 31st Germany demanded that Russia stopped general mobilisation. \"On 1 August 1914, Germany declared war on Russia, turning the Third Balkan War into a continental and, quite rapidly, a world war.\" \n\nRussia hoped that the war would last until Christmas, but after a year the situation on the Eastern front had become disastrous. The size of the Russian army was enormous; neither the transport nor the armament production was sufficient. In the big cities, there was a shortage of food and high prices and the Russian people blamed all on \"dark forces\". In the end of May shops and houses in Moscow, owned by Germans, were attacked. The crowd called for the Empress, who had German roots, to be locked up in a convent. In June, under pressure of public opinion, Sukhomlinov left on charges of abuse of power, inactivity, and high treason.\nWhen the German army occupied Warsaw in August 1915, the situation looked extremely grave because of a shortage in weapons and ammunition. Nobody had expected according to Sukhomlinov the war would take so long. On August 9, 1915, Sazonov, foreign minister, announced: \"The government hangs in mid-air, having support neither from above nor from below.\"\nThe situation was so serious that there were rumours of revolution and talk of a separate peace with Germany. Lenin wrote an article for the Zimmerwald Conference, convened by anti-militarist socialist parties, calling for the defeat of the Russian government. He rejected both the defense of Russia and the cry for peace; instead, he promoted a civil war. Trotsky declared: \"The right of nations to select their own government must be the immovable fundamental principle of international relations.\"\n\nOn 23 August 1915, the Tsar Nicholas took supreme command of the Russian armies, and replaced not only Grand Duke Nicholas but also Nikolai Yanushkevich, hoping this would lift morale. As he was absolutely incompetent in military matters, his action disturbed the Entente Powers and delighted the Germans. He was undoubtedly led to this fateful decision by the insistence of the Tsarina and of Rasputin who were, according to Nikolay Maklakov, the Interior Minister the only ones who supported the Tsar in his decision. \"Having one man in charge of the situation would consolidate all decision making.\" According to Sukhomlinov, the Tsar was unusually certain about his decision. Probably, as he felt ‘the heavy burden of political leadership slipping from his shoulders with immense relief’. However, his frequent absences from the Russian capital proved to be dire consequences for himself as well as for Russia. Nicholas's physical distance from the capital created a political vacuum. This void was filled, with the encouragement of her husband, by the empress.\n\nAll the ministers, even Ivan Goremykin, realized that the change would put Alexandra and Rasputin in charge and threatened to resign. Rodzianko expected his decision would harm the dynasty. All the Romanovs despised his decision; Duchess Maria Pavlovna wasn't the only one who feared the Empress would \"be the sole ruler of Russia\". The Progressive Bloc \"announced that it was willing to work with the government if Nicholas would appoint ministers that enjoyed true popular support.\" It demanded the forming of a \"government of confidence\", but the Tsar, unconvincable, rejected these proposals. The Imperial Duma was sent into recess on 3 September by an ukaze and would not gather again until 9 February 1916. (The Duma had a party and journalistic character. For the Tsarina: \"Nobody needs their opinion – they rather will address the question of sewage\".) On 26 September Nikolai Shcherbatov was replaced by Alexei Khvostov, a candidate from the extreme right. On 27 September, the lawyer Vasily Maklakov published his famous article in the \"Moscow Gazette\", describing Russia as a vehicle with no brakes, driven along a narrow mountain path by a \"mad chauffeur\". On 26 October Alexander Krivoshein who opposed the hasty dissolution of the Duma resigned as minister of State Property.\n\nNicholas's hostility to parliamentarism emerged at the very beginning of his reign in 1894; to him, it would cause Russia to disintegrate. According to S. Kulikov: \"Nicholas was pursuing the entirely specific idea of gradually replacing absolutism with dualism, rather than with parliamentarism.\" The idea of introducing any form of national representation was described by the Tsar as \"senseless dreams\". After Nicholas issued the October Manifesto in 1905 granting civil liberties and a national legislature, the Committee of Ministers was replaced with a Council of Ministers. On July 1, 1914, the Tsar suggested that the Duma should be reduced to merely a consultative body. On 24 August 1915 the Progressive Bloc, including the entire membership of the Duma, except the extreme right and the extreme left, was formed. The deputies tried to bring the Council \"uninterested in reform\" under control of the Duma. Their demands for a \"ministry of confidence\" were not received by the Tsar.\"\nIn late 1915, there was a shortage of food and of coal in the big cities; Alexander Trepov was appointed as crisis manager in the Minister of Railways. Five key ministries would gather on a more regular basis to solve the transport question. In November 1915 Rasputin told the old Goremykin it was not right not to convene the Duma as all were trying to cooperate; one must show them a little confidence.\nIn January 1916, Rasputin was opposed to the plan to send the old Goremykin away. who had persuaded the Tsar to reject the proposals of the Progressive Bloc.\n\nWhile seldom meeting with Alexandra personally after the debate in the Third Duma, Rasputin had become her personal adviser through daily telephone calls or weekly meetings with Vyrubova. Rasputin's personal influence over the Tsarina had become so great that it was he who ordered the destinies of Imperial Russia while she compelled her weak husband to fulfill them. According to Pierre Gilliard, \"her desires were interpreted by Rasputin, they seemed in her eyes to have the sanction and authority of a revelation.\" According to Nicholas V. Riasanovsky:\n\nAt the end of January 1916 Boris Stürmer was appointed as Prime Minister \"to the surprise of everyone, and most of all Goremykin, who, as was usual with the Emperor, had never been given the idea that he was even in danger.\" According to B. Pares, Stürmer was prepared to pose as a semi-liberal and would try in this way to keep the Duma quiet. According to Harold Williams, Stürmer was 'a more corrupt, cynical, incompetent, and lying functionary it would be difficult to find in the Russian Empire', but he was not opposed to the convening of the Duma, as Goremykin had been, and he would launch a more liberal and conciliatory politic. The Duma gathered on 9 February, on the condition not to mention Rasputin. The deputies were disappointed when Stürmer, a master of political compromise, made his indistinct speech. For the first time in his life, the Tsar made a visit to the Taurida Palace, suggesting he was willing to work with the legislature, which made it practically impossible to hiss at the new prime minister. According to Milyukov Stürmer would keep his dealings with the Duma to a minimum.\n\nIn the meantime, Khvostov and Beletsky had concocted a plan to kill Rasputin; the only way to get rid of him. What happened is hard to understand as every author has a different view on the intrigues between Khvostov, who was not appointed as Prime Minister, and Beletsky who was keen to become minister of the interior himself, or seems to have been fed up with his superior. Khvostov was told to contact Iliodor and buy his manuscript, as he tried to bribe the Tsarina with publishing \"The Mad Monk\", his book on Rasputin. Khvostov repeated the rumour which accused Rasputin of working for a separate peace and suggesting that Alexandra, Vyrubova, and Rasputin were German agents or spies. \nHis plan to arrange the murder of Rasputin became public knowledge. Rather paranoid, Rasputin went to Alexander Spiridovich, head of the palace police, on 1 March. He was constantly in a state of nervous excitement. Rasputin complained about the minister to the imperial couple. Khvostov, failing in protecting Alexandra and Rasputin, had to resign within three days and was banished to his estate.\n\nBoris Stürmer was then appointed on the Ministry of Interior, the most powerful of all, which had under its control governors, police, and a Special Corps of Gendarmes, the uniformed secret police. He had risen to the status of virtual dictator. In the same month, Minister of War Alexei Polivanov, who in his few months of office had brought about a recovery of the efficiency of the Russian army, was removed and replaced by Dmitry Shuvayev. According to Victor Chernov, the campaign of the party of the Empress and Rasputin was waged steadily against the eight ministers who \"had resisted the removal of the commander in chief (Grand Duke Nikolai), and one after the other they were discharged.\" According to Giles Milton: \n\nAt the request of France, the Russian army started the Lake Naroch Offensive, which was an utter failure. Rasputin met on Lake Ladoga with Gerard Shelley, whom he told he planned to go to the front, though General Mikhail Alekseev refused to see him. In a letter dated 5 May 1916, the Tsar asked his wife not to tell Rasputin about his plans concerning the Brusilov Offensive as troops were sent from Riga to the south. Early July, Aleksandr Khvostov, Alexei's uncle, not in good health, was appointed as Minister of the Interior and Makarov as Minister of Justice. Foreign Minister Sazonov, decisive when the war started, pleaded for an independent and autonomous Russian Poland. He was demoted on 10 July and the office given to Stürmer. On 21 July, the minister of agriculture Naumov refused to participate any longer the government. According to Vladimir Gurko, the Council of Ministers as a whole declined continually in importance. \n\nAround 6 September, Alexander Protopopov had been invited as Minister of the Interior. Placing the vice-president of the Duma in a key post might improve the relations between the Duma and the throne, but his contacts on peace and credit in Stockholm (without being authorized) became a scandal. When Protopopov raised the question of transferring the food supply from the Ministry of Agriculture to the Ministry of the Interior, a majority of the zemstvo leaders announced that they would not work with his ministry. His food plan was universally condemned by the Council of Ministers. \n\nOn 24 October (O.S), the Kingdom of Poland was established by its occupiers Germany and Austria. On 26 October, Sukhumlinov, who had been released from prison on instigation of Alexandra, Rasputin, and Protopopov, became her advisor on dealing with the Duma. According to Figes, the public was outraged. The opposition parties decided to attack Stürmer, his government, and the \"Dark forces\". A strongly prevailing opinion that Rasputin was the actual ruler of the country was of great psychological importance. \n\nOn 1 November, the government, under the pro peace, Boris Stürmer was attacked by Pavel Milyukov in the Imperial Duma. In his speech \"Rasputin and Rasputuiza\" he spoke of \"treachery and betrayal, about the dark forces, fighting in favor of Germany\", with the name of the Empress at the head of the list. He highlighted numerous governmental failures, concluding that Stürmer's policies placed in jeopardy the Triple Entente. After each accusation – many times without basis and lying intentionally – he asked \"Is this stupidity or is it treason?\" and the listeners demonstrated their belief that it was treason. His illegally printed speech was spread in flyers (according to Alexander Spiridovich by Puriskevich' hospital train) on the front and at the Hinterland. Stürmer and Protopopov asked in vain for the dissolution of the Duma. On 4 November Ivan Grigorovich and Dmitry Shuvayev declared in the Duma that they had confidence in the Russian people, the navy, and the army; the war could be won. Grand Duke Alexander Mikhailovich, his older brother George and his younger brother Nikolai, all requested the Tsar to fire Stürmer (and Aleksei Bobrinsky, the minister of agriculture and a spokesperson for landed interest). (Stürmer's resignation looks like a concession to the Duma.) His successor became Alexander Trepov, the minister of Transport. The Duma sessions were postponed for a week to allow the new administration to review the situation and to draw some conclusions from the increasingly complicated situation.\n\nGrand Duke Nikolai Mikhailovich, probably one of the key players, prince Lvov and general Mikhail Alekseyev, who believed secret strategic information had gone through the hands of Alexandra and Rasputin, attempted to persuade Nicholas to send the Empress away either to the Livadia Palace in Yalta or to England. For Paléologue, Alexandra Feodorovna was too impulsive, wrong-headed and unbalanced to imagine a political system and carry it out logically.\n\nOn 19 November Trepov tried three times to begin his speech in the Duma but he was drown out from the benches. The popular Vladimir Purishkevich held a two-hour speech, accusing the government of \"Germanophilism\" and stifling \"public initiative.\" The monarchy – because of what he called the \"ministerial leapfrog\" – had become \"fully descredited\". The trouble was that the different ministries did not cooperate. \n(According to Sukhomlinov, the ministers were not allowed to cooperate directly, without contacting and approval of the Tsar.) \nPurishkevich, a buffoon character, stated that Rasputin's murky influence over the Tsarina had made him a threat to the empire: \"While Rasputin is alive, we cannot win\".\n\nPrince Felix Yusupov was impressed by the remarkable speech. The next day, he visited Purishkevich, who quickly agreed to participate in the murder of Rasputin. Also, Grand Duke Dmitri Pavlovich received Yusupov's suggestion with alacrity, and his alliance was welcomed as indicating that the murder would not be a demonstration against the [Romanov] dynasty. Yusupov then approached a young officer Sergei Mikhailovich Sukhotin (1887–1926), a friend of his mother. Sukhotin served the Life Guards Infantry Regiment, but recuperating from injuries in Hotel Astoria, changed into a casino and hospital for (wounded) officers.\n\nAt the beginning of November, the Progressive Bloc decided again to stress the demand for a responsible government, that is, for a real parliamentary government.\" According to Figes, there was practically no one ... who did not see the need for a fundamental change in the structure of the government. Grand Duke Paul Alexandrovich of Russia, Dmitri's father, tried to persuade Nicholas on his nameday (6 December) to change his policy and accept a new constitution in order to save the monarchy. Also, Rodzianko told Nicholas the truth, after being urged by the Tsar's mother and sisters. To him, it was clear Alexandra should not be allowed to interfere in state affairs until the end of the war. She \"bombarded\" her husband with advises, and treated him as if he were a little boy, quite incapable of taking care of himself.\n\nAlexander Guchkov, an Old Believer and strong opponent of Nichelas II, came \"to the painful conclusion the situation could only improve when the Tsar was sent away\", Guchkov reported that five members of the Progressive Bloc, including himself, Kerensky, Nekrasov, Konovalov, and Tereschenko would consider a coup d'etat, to force the government to make concessions to the Duma. \"Prince Lvov and General Alekseev made up their minds that the Tsarina's hold on the Tsar must be broken in order to end the pressure being exerted on him, through her, by the Rasputin clique.\" Alexandra suggested to her husband to expel Guchkov, Milyukov, Polivanov, and Prince Lvov to Siberia, to dismiss Trepov and Makarov and to send the Duma deputees home, at least until February. Then the Duma would lose and Rasputin would gain influence. \n\nOn 10 November, the bellicose Alexander Trepov had been appointed as the new prime minister, but he could not count on a favorable reception. He made the dismissal of the exceedingly nervous Alexander Protopopov, who never had \"any effective proposal for the solution of any of the grave and critical problems\", an indispensable condition of his accepting the presidency of the Council. On 11 November Grand Duke Michael Alexandrovich wrote a candid letter to his brother warning him that the political situation was tense:\n\nThe Tsarina tried to keep Protopopov appointed on his influential position carrying out the duties of the minister of the internal affairs. Both Alexandra and Protopopov traveled to Stavka. The Tsar wrote to his wife: \"Please, don't bring our Friend\", but Rasputin and Vyrubova would send five telegrams to support her. Trepov was furious and threatened to resign. \n\nOn 17 November, Nikolai Pokrovsky, pro-British like Trepov, was appointed as foreign minister. On 31 November , Theobald von Bethmann-Hollweg tried to initiate a peace-making process and to end the war on base of his Septemberprogramm (1914). On 2 December, Trepov ascended the tribune in the Duma to read the government programme. The Prime-Minister wasn't allowed to speak and had to leave the rostrum three times. Being advised by Trepov, Pokrovsky said that Russia would never sign a peace treaty with the Central Powers which caused a storm of applause in the Tauride Palace. According to Puriskevich, Alexandra managed Russia as her boudoir, and attacked Rasputin, \"an illiterate moujik shall govern Russia no longer!\" \n\nThe 'peace offensive' was bound to fail; the terms too vague to be taken seriously. The allies refused an intermediation by president W. Wilson on . On the same day, Harold Williams or John Hanbury-Williams wrote to Lloyd George:\n\nOn 7 December, the cabinet demanded that Protopopov should go to the Emperor and resign. At the request of the Tsar, his wife, Anna Vyrubova and Rasputin combined Protopopov, who had only asked for a temporarily sick leave, was kept in office. Trepov, having failed to eliminate Protopopov, tried to bribe Rasputin in the following days. With the help of general A.A. Mosolov, his brother-in-law, Trepov offered a substantial amount of money, a bodyguard and a house to Rasputin, if he would leave politics. Rasputin refused and hardly left his house, except a visit to Vyrubova. \nOn 12 December, Trepov went to Stavka. The Tsar wrote to his wife: Rasputin suggested to keep the Duma closed till February; Alexandra and Protopopov supported him. \n\nOn Friday afternoon, 16 December, Rasputin returned from the \"banya\" at 3 p.m. Around 8 p.m., he told Anna Vyrubova, who presented him a small icon, signed and dated at the back by the Tsarina and her daughters, of a proposed midnight visit to Yusupov in his palace. Protopopov, a late visitor who only stayed ten minutes, begged him not to go out that night.\n\nNelipa thinks what happened next was intentionally timed; both Grand Duke Dmitry and Purishkevich, assisting at the front, had arrived in the city. Rasputin was murdered on the night after the Duma went into Christmas recess for an undecided period. According to Nelipa, \"the forthcoming recess would eliminate the otherwise predictable uproar from any of the delegates at the Tauride Palace, had the murder been arranged a few days earlier.\"\n\nThere are very few facts between the night Rasputin disappeared (Saturday, 17 December) and the following Monday when his corpse was dredged up from the river. \"As far as the Yusupov Palace is concerned, the Police had no right to make inquiries unless invited to do so. The Director of Police was unable to ask the simplest of questions such as who was present at the palace on the night,\" and \"nothing other than a cursory search was allowed inside.\" So the murder of Rasputin has become something of a legend, some of it invented, perhaps embellished or simply misremembered.\n\nYusupov, who had met Rasputin in the past six weeks for treatment, invited Rasputin to the Moika Palace, intimating his wife, Princess Irina, would be back from Koreiz and Rasputin could meet her after a housewarming party. (She later denied she was involved and sued MGM). After midnight, Prince Felix went with Dr. Stanislaus de Lazovert to Rasputin's apartment. Yusupov did not use the regular stairs at this unseemly hour, but a stairwell for servants in the courtyard. After half an hour, they returned to the recently refurbished palace, where a sound-proof room, part of the wine cellar, had been specially prepared for the crime with carpets, stain-glass lamps, and furnuture. Four bottles, containing different kinds of sweet wine, were placed either in a window, a side-board or on a table. Waiting in his drawing room on another floor were the fellow conspirators: Grand Duke Dmitri Pavlovich, Purishkevich, his assistant Lazovert and Sukhotin. Perhaps some women were invited but Yusupov did not mention their names; Radzinsky suggested Dimitri's step-sister Marianne Pistohlkors and film star Vera Karalli. Smith came up with Princess Olga Paley and Anna von Drenteln. Somewhere in the building were a major-domo and a valet, waiting for orders.\n\nAccording to both Yusupov and Purishkevich, a gramophone in the study played interminably the Yankee Doodle when Rasputin came in. Yusupov mentions in his unreliable memoirs, he then offered Rasputin tea and petit fours laced with a large amount of potassium cyanide. According to the diplomat, Maurice Paléologue, who in later years rewrote his diary, they discussed spirituality and occultism; the antique dealer Albert Stopford wrote that politics was the issue. Purishkevich, a teetotaler, mentions he could hear bottles were opened. Felix played his guitar and sang some gypsy ballads. After an hour or so, Rasputin was fairly drunk. Yusupov went upstairs and came back with a revolver. Rasputin was shot at close quarters by Felix sitting left of him. The bullet entered the chest under the heart, it left the body on the right side. Then Rasputin fell onto a white bearskin. \n\nAccording to Maria Rasputin, it went all very quick; no sweets, no guitar nor record playing. Rasputin would have become suspicious as Yusupov's wife never showed up. According to Yusupov's protégé, Victor Contreras, Lazavert who was assigned to poison the wine and cakes for Rasputin, couldn’t do it. After the murder, Lazavert seems to have written a letter to Yusupov, where he reported that he, the doctor, who gave the oath of Hippocrates, found no strength to add the poison.\n\nHowever, Yusupov did not succeed in killing Rasputin. According to Maria Rasputin, the bullet wounds were slight. After a while, \"Rasputin opened his eyes and became aware of his predicament.\" He struggled up the stairs to reach the first landing, opening an unlocked door to the courtyard, which had been—not long before—used by the conspirators. Alarmed by the noise, Purishkevich went down and fired at Rasputin four times, missing three times. Only one bullet penetrated the right kidney and lodged into the spine. Rasputin never reached the gate, but fell into the snow. According to Nelipa, both shots were fatal; he would have died within 10–20 minutes, but when the body made a sudden movement, one of them placed his revolver on the forehead and pulled the trigger. Then the body was carried back inside. A nervous Yusupov severely hit his victim in his right eye with his shoe.\n\nThe conspirators had planned to burn Rasputin's possessions; Sukhotin put on Rasputin's fur coat, his galoshes, and gloves. He left together with Dmitri Pavlovich and Dr. Lazovert in Purishkevich's car, to suggest that Rasputin had left the palace alive. Because Purishkevich's wife refused to burn the fur coat and the rubber galoshes in her small fireplace in the ambulance train, the conspirators went back from the Warsaw station to the Moika palace with these large items.\n\nTwo city policemen on duty, who heard a \"rapid fire\" of gunshot sequence, had also seen cars coming and leaving. They discussed the issue on the Pochtamtsky Bridge. One of them questioned Yusupov's butler for details, but was sent away. Twenty minutes later, he was re-invited to the palace. Purishkevich boasted he had shot Rasputin, and asked the policeman, aware of his mistake, to keep it quiet for the sake of the Tsar. However, this policeman told his superiors everything he had heard and seen.\n\nAfter the body was wrapped in a broadcloth, Dmitri and his fellow conspirators drove in the direction of Krestovsky island. The sentry on the bridge was asleep which allowed the murderers to draw up quite close to the railing and throw the corpse into a hole in the ice of the Malaya Nevka River. They forgot to attach weights to the feet to make the body sink. They drove back without noticing that one of Rasputin's galoshes was stuck between the pylons of the bridge. \n\nThe next morning, around 8 a.m., Protopopov phoned, and asked Rasputin's daughters where their father was. At eleven, he still had not shown up. When the police arrived, they searched the apartment for compromising correspondence with the Tsarina. In the meantime, Rasputin's disappearance was reported by Maria to Vyrubova. When Vyrubova spoke of it to the Empress, Alexandra pointed out that Princess Irina was absent from Petrograd. When Protopopov mentioned the story reported by the policemen at the Moika, where Purishkevich boasted he had killed Rasputin, they all began to believe that he had been lured into an ambush.\n\nOn the Empress' orders, a police investigation commenced and traces of blood were discovered on the steps to the backdoor of the Yusupov Palace. When interrogated, Felix explained the blood with a story that by accident one of his sporting dogs was shot by Grand Duke Dmitri. In the early afternoon, traces of blood were detected on the parapet of the Bolshoy Petrovsky bridge and one of Rasputin's galoshes was found under the bridge. Maria and her sister affirmed it belonged to their father. With twilight approaching the search had to be abandoned until the following morning. In the evening, Yusupov tried to leave the capital, but he was stopped at the train station.\n\nThe next day, it was sunny, but the temperature dropped to -14 C. The river was frozen. The police concentrated upon the vicinity of the Petrovsky bridge. Then the Neva shores were explored by divers, but the ice seriously hampered their work which produced no result.\n\nFelix and Dmitri both tried to gain access to the empress. The Tsarina refused to meet the two but said they could explain to her what had happened in a letter. \nPurishkevich assisted them writing and left the city at ten on Sunday evening, heading to the front. When an Uhlenhuth test showed, the blood was of human origin they refused to tell where the body was. Felix and Dmitri were placed under house arrest in the Sergei Palace. \nOn Monday morning, 19 December, Rasputin's beaver-fur coat and the body were discovered close to the river bank, 140 meters west of the bridge. The police and government officials arrived within 15 minutes. In the late afternoon, it was decided the frozen corpse had to be taken to the desolate Chesmensky Almshouse. On the next day, Makarov was fired, hindering a police investigation, as he had given Felix permission to leave for the Crimea. In the evening, an autopsy on the thawed corpse by Kosorotov, a forensic expert, in a poorly lit mortuary room established that the cause of his instant death was the third bullet in his frontal lobe. (Kosorotov's official report is still missing.)\n\nOn 21 December, Rasputin's body was taken in a zinc coffin from the Chesmensky Almshouse to be buried in a corner on the property of Vyrubova and adjacent to the palace. The weather was grey, with 12 frost\". The burial at 8.45 in the morning was attended by the Imperial couple with their daughters, Vyrubova, her maid, and a few of Rasputin's friends, such as Lili Dehn, Protopopov and Colonel Loman. It is not clear whether Rasputin's two daughters were present, although Maria Rasputin claimed she was there. On the 22nd, Irina's father, Grand Duke Alexander Mikhailovich, wrote his brother to close the case. After a week and without an interrogation or a trial, the Tsar sent Grand Duke Dmitry Pavlovich, and Yusupov into exile. He ensured that Rasputin's murder would never become a matter for the court to judge. On Saturday, 24 December, Dmitri left at two in the morning for Qazvin in Persia, Felix for Rakitnoe, his estate near Belgorod; during the trip they were forbidden to talk, and also to send and receive telegrams. The police were ordered to stop their inquest. Neither Puriskevich, nor Sukhotin, nor Lazavert was punished at all. On Sunday, 25 December, the Imperial family gathered with Rasputin's widow and children at Anna Vyrubova.\n\nOn 27 December, a hesitating Nikolai Golitsyn became the successor of Trepov, who was dismissed. Golitsyn begged the Emperor to cancel his appointment, citing his lack of preparation for the role of Prime Minister. Also Pavel Ignatieff, a popular minister of education, and Dmitry Shuvayev were dismissed not long after.\n\nThe Duma President Mikhail Rodzianko, Grand Duchess Marie Pavlovna and British ambassador Buchanan joined calls for Alexandra to be removed from influence, but Nicholas still refused to take their advice. The breakup of Nicholas and Alexandra Fyodorovna with the Imperial family became a fait accompli. According to Milyukov many people suddenly came to the conclusion that the problem was not Rasputin, but the Emperor unable to react on what happened. Under growing political and economic crises Golitsyn called for a dialogue with the Duma. On 14 February, the date set for the reopening of the Duma, Kerensky attacked the mediaeval regime. According to Milyukov: \"Chief among them was the desire to bring the war to a successful conclusion in conjunction with the Allies; and the very cause of their opposition was the ever deepening conviction that this was unattainable under the present government and under the present regime.\"\n\nThe February Revolution began on the 22nd when the Tsar had left for the front, and strikes broke out in the Putilov workshops. On 23rd (International Women's Day), women in Saint Petersburg joined the strike for \"Bread and Peace\" – demanding the end of World War I, an end to Russian food shortages, and the end of czarism. On February 25, already 250,000 people were on strike. On Sunday 26 February, soldiers of the Volynsky Regiment brought the Litovsky, Preobrazhensky, and Moskovsky Regiments out on the street to join the rebellion, demanding a new constitutional government and woman suffrage. The Tsar ordered Sergey Semyonovich Khabalov, an inexperienced and extremely indecisive commander of the Petrograd military district and Nikolay Iudovich Ivanov to suppress the rioting by force. On the 27th Duma delegates received an order from his Majesty that he had decided to prorogue the Duma until April, leaving it with no legal authority to act. The delegates decided to form a Provisional Committee of the State Duma. \"On the evening the Council of Ministers of Russia held its last meeting in the Marinsky Palace and formally submitted its resignation to the Tsar. The Provisional Committee ordered the arrest of all the ex-ministers and senior officials.\" \nIn Tsarskoe Selo, the units guarding the Alexander Palace \"declared their neutrality\" and thus abandoned the imperial family on 28 February. The monarchy was deserted by all the élites of the old society, the landowners, the army officers, the industrialists, and politicians of the Duma. The Tsar left Mogilev, but was unable to travel to Petrograd as revolutionaries controlled train stations. On 2 March 1917, Nikolai Ruzsky, Vasily Shulgin and Guchkov came to the station at Pskov to persuade the Tsar, accompanied by Vladimir Freedericksz, to resign.\n\nOn 4 March, the investigation on Rasputin was stopped by Kerensky and he extended an amnesty to the three main conspirators. On 8 March, all the movements of the imperial family were restricted as the grave of Rasputin had become a place of veneration for the Tsarina and her daughters. Rasputin's secret grave site was quickly discovered under a pile of rocks in the woods. The coffin was transported to the town hall, where a curious crowd gathered, and secured under guard over night. According to Moynahan:\n\nAuthors do not agree what happened on the night of 10/11 March after the truck drove on its way north in the direction of Piskarevka in the Vyborgsky District. According to some, the truck broke down or the snow forced them to stop and the corpse was burned in a field. It is more likely Rasputin's corpse was incinerated (between 3 and 7 in the morning) in the cauldrons of in the nearby boiler shop of the Saint Petersburg State Polytechnical University, including the coffin, without leaving a single trace. \n\nThe official police report, with details gathered in two days, and stopped with the idea the murder was solved, is unconvincing. \"Unfortunately, after the Soviets came to power, many of the documents that formed part of the official secret investigation have either been destroyed, or have disappeared.\" What is left are the biased accounts of 19-year-old Maria Rasputin and the murderers, the 29-year-old Felix Yusupov and 47-year-old Vladimir Purishkevich, and others. The theatrical details of the murder given by Felix have never stood up to scrutiny. He changed his account several times; the statement given to the Petrograd police, the accounts given whilst in exile in the Crimea in 1917, his 1927 book, and finally the accounts given under oath to libel juries in 1934 and 1965 all differ to some extent. \n\nYusupov's role in the murder has been called into question, being consumed by the thought that \"not a single important event at the front was decided [during the war] without a preliminary conference\" between Alexandra and Rasputin. \n\nConcerning the details of the murder, not even the murderers could give consistent accounts. Differing opinions ranged from the colour of shirt he wore, how many times Yusupov went up the stairs, to whose weapon or car was used or even where he was finally wounded. Neither Purishkevich nor Yusupov mentioned the close quarter shot to the forehead. Purishkevich said he fired at Rasputin from behind at a distance of twenty paces and hit Rasputin in the back of the head. Unfortunately there is no photo of the rear of Rasputin's head.\n\nThe caliber of the weapon that was used cannot be measured. \"The hypothesis that the gunshot to the head was caused by an unjacketed bullet (of British origin) is not supported by the forensic findings or police forensic photographs.\" Nelipa thinks it is not very likely a Webley .455 inch and an unjacketed bullet was used because its impact would have been different.\n\nAccording to the 1916 autopsy report by Dmitri Kosorotov, two bullets had passed through the body, so it was impossible to tell how many people were shooting and to determine whether only one kind of revolver was used. \"Kosorotov never stated that different caliber weapons were responsible.\" \n\nThere were two officers of the British Secret Intelligence Service (SIS) in Petrograd at the time. Lieutenant Oswald Rayner and Captain Stephen Alley, born in a Arkhangelskoye Palace near Moscow in 1876, where his father was one of the prince's tutors.\nRayner knew Yusupov since they had met at University of Oxford. \n\nAccording to Sir Samuel Hoare, head of the British Intelligence Service in Russia: \"If MI6 had a part in the killing of Rasputin, I would have expected to have found some trace of that\". \"Hoare later came to the realization that in the days after the murder, Russian \"rightists\" had been trying to frame the British for the crime, and him, in particular. Hoare, Rayner, and presumably the rest of the mission, knew of the plot ... but \"the archives of the British intelligence service (MI6) do not hold a single document linking Rayner, Hoare, or any other British agent or diplomat to the murder.\"\n\n\nRasputin was more multifaceted and more significant than the myths that grew up around him:\n\n\n\n\n\nAfter his death, the memoirs of those who knew Rasputin became a mini-industry. The basement where he died is a tourist attraction. Numerous film and stage productions have been based on his life. He has appeared as a fictionalized version of himself in numerous other media, as well as having several beverages named after him. More than 150 items on Rasputin-like bands, comics, and other products bear his name.\n\n\n", "id": "12804", "title": "Grigori Rasputin"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12806", "text": "Gemstone\n\nA gemstone (also called a gem, fine gem, jewel, precious stone or semi-precious stone) is a piece of mineral crystal which, in cut and polished form, is used to make jewelry or other adornments. However, certain rocks (such as lapis lazuli) or organic materials that are not minerals (such as amber, jet, and pearl) are also used for jewelry and are therefore often considered to be gemstones as well. Most gemstones are hard, but some soft minerals are used in jewelry because of their luster or other physical properties that have aesthetic value. Rarity is another characteristic that lends value to a gemstone. Apart from jewelry, from earliest antiquity engraved gems and hardstone carvings, such as cups, were major luxury art forms. A gem maker is called a lapidary or gemcutter; a diamond worker is a diamantaire.\n\nThe carvings of Carl Fabergé are significant works in this tradition.\n\nThe traditional classification in the West, which goes back to the ancient Greeks, begins with a distinction between \"precious\" and \"semi-precious\"; similar distinctions are made in other cultures. In modern usage the precious stones are diamond, ruby, sapphire, and emerald, with all other gemstones being semi-precious. This distinction reflects the rarity of the respective stones in ancient times, as well as their quality: all are translucent with fine color in their purest forms, except for the colorless diamond, and very hard, with hardnesses of 8 to 10 on the Mohs scale. Other stones are classified by their color, translucency and hardness. The traditional distinction does not necessarily reflect modern values, for example, while garnets are relatively inexpensive, a green garnet called tsavorite can be far more valuable than a mid-quality emerald. Another unscientific term for semi-precious gemstones used in art history and archaeology is hardstone. Use of the terms 'precious' and 'semi-precious' in a commercial context is, arguably, misleading in that it deceptively implies certain stones are intrinsically more valuable than others, which is not necessarily the case.\n\nIn modern times gemstones are identified by gemologists, who describe gems and their characteristics using technical terminology specific to the field of gemology. The first characteristic a gemologist uses to identify a gemstone is its chemical composition. For example, diamonds are made of carbon (C) and rubies of aluminium oxide (). Next, many gems are crystals which are classified by their crystal system such as cubic or trigonal or monoclinic. Another term used is habit, the form the gem is usually found in. For example, diamonds, which have a cubic crystal system, are often found as octahedrons.\n\nGemstones are classified into different \"groups\", \"species\", and \"varieties\". For example, ruby is the red variety of the species corundum, while any other color of corundum is considered sapphire. Other examples are the Emerald (green), aquamarine (blue), red beryl (red), goshenite (colorless), heliodor (yellow), and morganite (pink), which are all varieties of the mineral species beryl.\n\nGems are characterized in terms of refractive index, dispersion, specific gravity, hardness, cleavage, fracture, and luster. They may exhibit pleochroism or double refraction. They may have luminescence and a distinctive absorption spectrum.\n\nMaterial or flaws within a stone may be present as inclusions.\n\nGemstones may also be classified in terms of their \"water\". This is a recognized grading of the gem's luster, transparency, or \"brilliance\". Very transparent gems are considered \"first water\", while \"second\" or \"third water\" gems are those of a lesser transparency.\n\nThere is no universally accepted grading system for gemstones. Diamonds are graded using a system developed by the Gemological Institute of America (GIA) in the early 1950s. Historically, all gemstones were graded using the naked eye. The GIA system included a major innovation: the introduction of 10x magnification as the standard for grading clarity. Other gemstones are still graded using the naked eye (assuming 20/20 vision).\n\nA mnemonic device, the \"four Cs\" (color, cut, clarity and carats), has been introduced to help the consumer understand the factors used to grade a diamond. With modification, these categories can be useful in understanding the grading of all gemstones. The four criteria carry different weight depending upon whether they are applied to colored gemstones or to colorless diamonds. In diamonds, cut is the primary determinant of value, followed by clarity and color. Diamonds are meant to sparkle, to break down light into its constituent rainbow colors (dispersion), chop it up into bright little pieces (scintillation), and deliver it to the eye (brilliance). In its rough crystalline form, a diamond will do none of these things; it requires proper fashioning and this is called \"cut\". In gemstones that have color, including colored diamonds, it is the purity and beauty of that color that is the primary determinant of quality.\n\nPhysical characteristics that make a colored stone valuable are color, clarity to a lesser extent (emeralds will always have a number of inclusions), cut, unusual optical phenomena within the stone such as color zoning (the uneven distribution of coloring within a gem) and asteria (star effects). The Greeks, for example, greatly valued asteria gemstones, which were regarded as powerful love charms, and Helen of Troy was known to have worn star-corundum.\n\nAside from the diamond, the ruby, sapphire, emerald, pearl (not, strictly speaking, a gemstone), and opal have also been considered to be precious. Up to the discoveries of bulk amethyst in Brazil in the 19th century, amethyst was considered a \"precious stone\" as well, going back to ancient Greece. Even in the last century certain stones such as aquamarine, peridot and cat's eye (cymophane) have been popular and hence been regarded as precious.\n\nToday such a distinction is no longer made by the gemstone trade. Many gemstones are used in even the most expensive jewelry, depending on the brand name of the designer, fashion trends, market supply, treatments, etc. Nevertheless, diamonds, rubies, sapphires, and emeralds still have a reputation that exceeds those of other gemstones.\n\nRare or unusual gemstones, generally meant to include those gemstones which occur so infrequently in gem quality that they are scarcely known except to connoisseurs, include andalusite, axinite, cassiterite, clinohumite and red beryl.\n\nGem prices can fluctuate heavily (such as those of tanzanite over the years) or can be quite stable (such as those of diamonds). In general per carat prices of larger stones are higher than those of smaller stones, but popularity of certain sizes of stone can affect prices. Typically prices can range from US$1/carat for a normal amethyst to US$20,000–50,000 for a collector's three carat pigeon-blood almost \"perfect\" ruby.\n\nThere are a number of laboratories which grade and provide reports on gemstones.\n\n\nEach laboratory has its own methodology to evaluate gemstones. A stone can be called \"pink\" by one lab while another lab calls it \"padparadscha\". One lab can conclude a stone is untreated, while another lab might conclude that it is heat-treated. To minimise such differences, seven of the most respected labs, AGTA-GTL (New York), CISGEM (Milano), GAAJ-ZENHOKYO (Tokyo), GIA (Carlsbad), GIT (Bangkok), Gübelin (Lucerne) and SSEF (Basel), have established the Laboratory Manual Harmonisation Committee (LMHC), for the standardization of wording reports, promotion of certain analytical methods and interpretation of results. Country of origin has sometimes been difficult to determine, due to the constant discovery of new source locations. Determining a \"country of origin\" is thus much more difficult than determining other aspects of a gem (such as cut, clarity, etc.).\n\nGem dealers are aware of the differences between gem laboratories and will make use of the discrepancies to obtain the best possible certificate.\n\nA few gemstones are used as gems in the crystal or other form in which they are found. Most however, are cut and polished for usage as jewelry. The picture to the left is of a rural, commercial cutting operation in Thailand. This small factory cuts thousands of carats of sapphire annually. The two main classifications are stones cut as smooth, dome shaped stones called cabochons, and stones which are cut with a faceting machine by polishing small flat windows called facets at regular intervals at exact angles.\n\nStones which are opaque or semi-opaque such as opal, turquoise, variscite, etc. are commonly cut as cabochons. These gems are designed to show the stone's color or surface properties as in opal and star sapphires. Grinding wheels and polishing agents are used to grind, shape and polish the smooth dome shape of the stones.\n\nGems which are transparent are normally faceted, a method which shows the optical properties of the stone's interior to its best advantage by maximizing reflected light which is perceived by the viewer as sparkle. There are many commonly used shapes for faceted stones. The facets must be cut at the proper angles, which varies depending on the optical properties of the gem. If the angles are too steep or too shallow, the light will pass through and not be reflected back toward the viewer. The faceting machine is used to hold the stone onto a flat lap for cutting and polishing the flat facets. Rarely, some cutters use special curved laps to cut and polish curved facets.\n\nThe color of any material is due to the nature of light itself. Daylight, often called white light, is actually all of the colors of the spectrum combined. When light strikes a material, most of the light is absorbed while a smaller amount of a particular frequency or wavelength is reflected. The part that is reflected reaches the eye as the perceived color. A ruby appears red because it absorbs all the other colors of white light (green and blue), while reflecting the red.\n\nA material which is mostly the same can exhibit different colors. For example, ruby and sapphire have the same primary chemical composition (both are corundum) but exhibit different colors because of impurities. Even the same named gemstone can occur in many different colors: sapphires show different shades of blue and pink and \"fancy sapphires\" exhibit a whole range of other colors from yellow to orange-pink, the latter called \"padparadscha sapphire\".\n\nThis difference in color is based on the atomic structure of the stone. Although the different stones formally have the same chemical composition and structure, they are not exactly the same. Every now and then an atom is replaced by a completely different atom, sometimes as few as one in a million atoms. These so-called impurities are sufficient to absorb certain colors and leave the other colors unaffected.\n\nFor example, beryl, which is colorless in its pure mineral form, becomes emerald with chromium impurities. If manganese is added instead of chromium, beryl becomes pink morganite. With iron, it becomes aquamarine.\n\nSome gemstone treatments make use of the fact that these impurities can be \"manipulated\", thus changing the color of the gem.\n\nGemstones are often treated to enhance the color or clarity of the stone. Depending on the type and extent of treatment, they can affect the value of the stone. Some treatments are used widely because the resulting gem is stable, while others are not accepted most commonly because the gem color is unstable and may revert to the original tone.\n\nHeat can improve gemstone color or clarity. The heating process has been well known to gem miners and cutters for centuries, and in many stone types heating is a common practice. Most citrine is made by heating amethyst, and partial heating with a strong gradient results in ametrine—a stone partly amethyst and partly citrine. Much aquamarine is heated to remove yellow tones and change the green color into the more desirable blue or enhance its existing blue color to a purer blue.\n\nNearly all tanzanite is heated at low temperatures to remove brown undertones and give a more desirable blue/purple color. A considerable portion of all sapphire and ruby is treated with a variety of heat treatments to improve both color and clarity.\n\nWhen jewelry containing diamonds is heated (for repairs) the diamond should be protected with boric acid; otherwise the diamond (which is pure carbon) could be burned on the surface or even burned completely up. When jewelry containing sapphires or rubies is heated, it should not be coated with boracic acid or any other substance, as this can etch the surface; they do not have to be \"protected\" like a diamond.\n\nVirtually all blue topaz, both the lighter and the darker blue shades such as \"London\" blue, has been irradiated to change the color from white to blue. Most greened quartz (Oro Verde) is also irradiated to achieve the yellow-green color. Diamonds are irradiated to produce fancy-color diamonds (which occur naturally, though rarely in gem quality).\n\nEmeralds containing natural fissures are sometimes filled with wax or oil to disguise them. This wax or oil is also colored to make the emerald appear of better color as well as clarity. Turquoise is also commonly treated in a similar manner.\n\nFracture filling has been in use with different gemstones such as diamonds, emeralds and sapphires. In 2006 \"glass filled rubies\" received publicity. Rubies over 10 carats (2 g) with large fractures were filled with lead glass, thus dramatically improving the appearance (of larger rubies in particular). Such treatments are fairly easy to detect.\n\nIt is important to distinguish between synthetic gemstones, and imitation or simulated gems.\n\nSynthetic gems are physically, optically and chemically identical to the natural stone, but are created in controlled conditions in a laboratory. Imitation or simulated stones are chemically different than the natural stone but may be optically similar to it; they can be glass, plastic, resins or other compounds.\n\nExamples of simulated or imitation stones include cubic zirconia, composed of zirconium oxide and simulated moissanite, which are both diamond simulants. The imitations copy the look and color of the real stone but possess neither their chemical nor physical characteristics. Moissanite actually has a higher refractive index than diamond and when presented beside an equivalently sized and cut diamond will have more \"fire\" than the diamond.\n\nSynthetic, cultured or lab-created gemstones are not imitations. For example, diamonds, rubies, sapphires and emeralds have been manufactured in labs to possess identical chemical and physical characteristics to the naturally occurring variety. Synthetic (lab created) corundum, including ruby and sapphire, is very common and costs much less than the natural stones. Smaller synthetic diamonds have been manufactured in large quantities as industrial abrasives, although larger gem-quality synthetic diamonds are becoming available in multiple carats.\n\nWhether a gemstone is a natural stone or lab-created (synthetic), the physical characteristics are the same. Lab-created stones tend to have a more vivid color to them, as impurities are not present in a lab and do not modify the clarity or color of the stone, unless added intentionally for a specific purpose.\n\nThe following is a list of extremely rare gemstones.\n\n\n\n", "id": "12806", "title": "Gemstone"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12807", "text": "Gerard David\n\nGerard David (c. 1460 – 13 August 1523) was an Early Netherlandish painter and manuscript illuminator known for his brilliant use of color. Only a bare outline of his life survives, although some facts are known. He may have been the \"Meester gheraet van brugghe\" who became a master of the Antwerp guild in 1515. He was very successful in his lifetime and probably ran two workshops, in Antwerp and Bruges. His reputation diminished in the 17th century until he was rediscovered in the 19th century.\n\nHe was born in Oudewater, now located in the province of Utrecht. His year of birth is approximated as c. 1460 on the basis that he looks to be around 50 years in the 1509 self-portrait found in his \"Virgin among the Virgins\". He spent his mature career in Bruges, where he was a member of the painters' guild. Upon the death of Hans Memling in 1494, David became Bruges' leading painter. He moved to Bruges in 1483, presumably from Haarlem, where he had formed his early style under Albert van Oudewater, and joined the Guild of Saint Luke at Bruges in 1484. He became dean of the guild in 1501, and in 1496 married Cornelia Cnoop, daughter of the dean of the goldsmiths' guild. David was one of the town's leading citizens.\n\nAmbrosius Benson served his apprenticeship with David, but they came into dispute around 1519 over a number of paintings and drawings Benson had collected from other artists. Because of a large debt owed to him by Benson, David had refused to return the material. Benson pursued the matter legally and won, leading to David serving time in prison.\n\nHe died on 13 August 1523 and was buried in the Church of Our Lady at Bruges.\n\nDavid had been completely forgotten when in the early 1860s he was rescued from oblivion by William Henry James Weale, whose researches in the archives of Bruges brought to light the main facts of the painter's life and led to the reconstruction of David's artistic personality, beginning with the recognition of David's only documented work, the \"Virgin Among Virgins\" at Rouen.\n\nDavid's surviving work mainly consists of religious scenes. They are characterised by an atmospheric, timeless, and almost dream like serenity, achieved through soft, warm and subtle colourisation, and masterful handling of light and shadow. He is innovative in his recasting of traditional themes and in his approach to landscape, which was then only an emerging genre in northern European painting. His ability with landscape can be seen in the detailed foliage of his \"Triptych of the Baptism\" and the forest scene in the New York \"Nativity\".\n\nAlthough many of the art historians of the early 20th century, including Erwin Panofsky and Max Jakob Friedländer saw him as a painter who did little but distill the style of others and painted in an archaic and unimaginative style. However today most view him as a master colourist, and a painter who according to the Metropolitan Museum of Art, worked in a \"progressive, even enterprising, mode, casting off his late medieval heritage and proceeding with a certain purity of vision in an age of transition.\"\n\nIn his early work David followed Haarlem artists such as Dirk Bouts, Albert van Oudewater and Geertgen tot Sint Jans, though he had already given evidence of superior power as a colourist. To this early period belong the \"St John\" of the collection in Berlin and the Salting's \"St Jerome\". In Bruges came directly under the influence of Memling, the master whom he followed most closely. It was from him that David acquired a solemnity of treatment, greater realism in the rendering of human form, and an orderly arrangement of figures.\n\nHe visited Antwerp in 1515 and was impressed with the work of Quentin Matsys, who had introduced a greater vitality and intimacy in the conception of sacred themes.\n\nThe works for which David is best known are the altarpieces painted before his visit to Antwerp: the \"Marriage of St Catherine\" at the National Gallery, London; the triptych of the \"Madonna Enthroned and Saints\" of the Brignole-Sale collection in Genoa; the \"Annunciation\" of the Sigmaringen collection; and above all, the \"Madonna with Angels and Saints\", which he donated to the Carmelite Nuns of Sion at Bruges, and which is now in the Rouen museum.\n\nOnly a few of his works have remained in Bruges: \"The Judgment of Cambyses\", \"The Flaying of Sisamnes\" and the \"Baptism of Christ\" in the Groeningemuseum, and the \"Transfiguration\" in the Church of Our Lady.\n\nThe rest were scattered around the world, and to this may be due the oblivion into which his very name had fallen; this, and the fact that, some believed that for all the beauty and the soulfulness of his work, he had nothing innovative to add to the history of art.\nEven in his best work he had only given newer variations of the art of his predecessors and contemporaries. His rank among the masters was renewed, however, when a number of his paintings were assembled at the seminal 1902 Gruuthusemuseum, Bruges exhibition of early Flemish painters.\n\nHe also worked closely with the leading manuscript illuminators of the day, and seems to have been brought in to paint specific important miniatures himself, among them a \"Virgin among the Virgins\" in the Morgan Library, a \"Virgin and Child on a Crescent Moon\" in the \"Rothschild Prayerbook\", and a portrait of the Emperor Maximilian in Vienna. Several of his drawings also survive, and elements from these appear in the works of other painters and illuminators for several decades after his death.\n\nAt the time of David's death, the glory of Bruges and its painters was on the wane: Antwerp had become the leader in art as well as in political and commercial importance. Of David's pupils in Bruges, only Isenbrant, Albert Cornelis and Ambrosius Benson achieved importance. Among other Flemish painters, Joachim Patinir and Jan Mabuse were to some degree influenced by him.\n\n", "id": "12807", "title": "Gerard David"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12808", "text": "GSM\n\nGSM (Global System for Mobile Communications, originally Groupe SpécialMobile), is a standard developed by the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) to describe the protocols for second-generation (2G) digital cellular networks used by mobile phones, first deployed in Finland in July 1991. it has become the de facto global standard for mobile communications – with over 90% market share, operating in over 219 countries and territories.\n\n2G networks developed as a replacement for first generation (1G) analog cellular networks, and the GSM standard originally described as a digital, circuit-switched network optimized for full duplex voice telephony. This expanded over time to include data communications, first by circuit-switched transport, then by packet data transport via GPRS (General Packet Radio Services) and EDGE (Enhanced Data rates for GSM Evolution or EGPRS).\n\nSubsequently, the 3GPP developed third-generation (3G) UMTS standards followed by fourth-generation (4G) LTE Advanced standards, which do not form part of the ETSI GSM standard.\n\n\"GSM\" is a trademark owned by the GSM Association. It may also refer to the (initially) most common voice codec used, Full Rate.\n\nIn 1982 work began to develop a European standard for digital cellular voice telecommunications when the European Conference of Postal and Telecommunications Administrations (CEPT) set up the Groupe Spécial Mobile committee and later provided a permanent technical-support group based in Paris. Five years later, in 1987, 15 representatives from 13 European countries signed a memorandum of understanding in Copenhagen to develop and deploy a common cellular telephone system across Europe, and EU rules were passed to make GSM a mandatory standard. The decision to develop a continental standard eventually resulted in a unified, open, standard-based network which was larger than that in the United States.\n\nIn February 1987 Europe produced the very first agreed GSM Technical Specification. Ministers from the four big EU countries cemented their political support for GSM with the Bonn Declaration on Global Information Networks in May and the GSM MoU was tabled for signature in September. The MoU drew-in mobile operators from across Europe to pledge to invest in new GSM networks to an ambitious common date. It got GSM up-and-running fast.\n\nIn this short 38-week period the whole of Europe (countries and industries) had been brought behind GSM in a rare unity and speed guided by four public officials: Armin Silberhorn (Germany), Stephen Temple (UK), Philippe Dupuis (France), and Renzo Failli (Italy). In 1989, the Groupe Spécial Mobile committee was transferred from CEPT to the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI).\n\nIn parallel, France and Germany signed a joint development agreement in 1984 and were joined by Italy and the UK in 1986. In 1986 the European Commission proposed reserving the 900 MHz spectrum band for GSM. The former Finnish prime minister Harri Holkeri made the world's first GSM call on July 1, 1991, calling Kaarina Suonio (mayor of the city of Tampere) using a network built by Telenokia and Siemens and operated by Radiolinja. In the following year, 1992, saw the sending of the first short messaging service (SMS or \"text message\") message, and Vodafone UK and Telecom Finland signed the first international roaming agreement.\n\nWork began in 1991 to expand the GSM standard to the 1800 MHz frequency band and the first 1800 MHz network became operational in the UK by 1993 called and DCS 1800. Also that year, Telecom Australia became the first network operator to deploy a GSM network outside Europe and the first practical hand-held GSM mobile phone became available.\n\nIn 1995, fax, data and SMS messaging services were launched commercially, the first 1900 MHz GSM network became operational in the United States and GSM subscribers worldwide exceeded 10 million. In the same year, the GSM Association formed. Pre-paid GSM SIM cards were launched in 1996 and worldwide GSM subscribers passed 100 million in 1998.\n\nIn 2000 the first commercial GPRS services were launched and the first GPRS-compatible handsets became available for sale. In 2001 the first UMTS (W-CDMA) network was launched, a 3G technology that is not part of GSM. Worldwide GSM subscribers exceeded 500 million. In 2002 the first Multimedia Messaging Service (MMS) were introduced and the first GSM network in the 800 MHz frequency band became operational. EDGE services first became operational in a network in 2003 and the number of worldwide GSM subscribers exceeded 1 billion in 2004.\n\nBy 2005, GSM networks accounted for more than 75% of the worldwide cellular network market, serving 1.5 billion subscribers. In 2005 the first HSDPA-capable network also became operational. The first HSUPA network launched in 2007. (High-Speed Packet Access (HSPA) and its uplink and downlink versions are 3G technologies, not part of GSM.) Worldwide GSM subscribers exceeded three billion in 2008.\n\nThe GSM Association estimated in 2010 that technologies defined in the GSM standard serve 80% of the global mobile market, encompassing more than 5 billion people across more than 212 countries and territories, making GSM the most ubiquitous of the many standards for cellular networks.\n\nNote that GSM is a second-generation (2G) standard employing Time-Division Multiple-Access (TDMA) spectrum-sharing, issued by the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI). The GSM standard does not include the 3G UMTS CDMA-based technology nor the 4G LTE OFDMA-based technology standards issued by the 3GPP.\n\nTelstra in Australia has shut down its 2G GSM network on December 1, 2016, which makes it the first mobile network operator to decommission a GSM network. The second mobile provider planning to shut down its GSM network (on January 1, 2017) is AT&T Mobility from the United States.\nSingapore will phase out 2G services by April 2017.\n\nThe network is structured into a number of discrete sections:\n\nGSM is a cellular network, which means that cell phones connect to it by searching for cells in the immediate vicinity. There are five different cell sizes in a GSM network—macro, micro, pico, femto, and umbrella cells. The coverage area of each cell varies according to the implementation environment. Macro cells can be regarded as cells where the base station antenna is installed on a mast or a building above average rooftop level. Micro cells are cells whose antenna height is under average rooftop level; they are typically used in urban areas. Picocells are small cells whose coverage diameter is a few dozen meters; they are mainly used indoors. Femtocells are cells designed for use in residential or small business environments and connect to the service provider’s network via a broadband internet connection. Umbrella cells are used to cover shadowed regions of smaller cells and fill in gaps in coverage between those cells.\n\nCell horizontal radius varies depending on antenna height, antenna gain, and propagation conditions from a couple of hundred meters to several tens of kilometres. The longest distance the GSM specification supports in practical use is . There are also several implementations of the concept of an extended cell, where the cell radius could be double or even more, depending on the antenna system, the type of terrain, and the timing advance.\n\nIndoor coverage is also supported by GSM and may be achieved by using an indoor picocell base station, or an indoor repeater with distributed indoor antennas fed through power splitters, to deliver the radio signals from an antenna outdoors to the separate indoor distributed antenna system. These are typically deployed when significant call capacity is needed indoors, like in shopping centers or airports. However, this is not a prerequisite, since indoor coverage is also provided by in-building penetration of the radio signals from any nearby cell.\n\nGSM networks operate in a number of different carrier frequency ranges (separated into GSM frequency ranges for 2G and UMTS frequency bands for 3G), with most 2G GSM networks operating in the 900 MHz or 1800 MHz bands. Where these bands were already allocated, the 850 MHz and 1900 MHz bands were used instead (for example in Canada and the United States). In rare cases the 400 and 450 MHz frequency bands are assigned in some countries because they were previously used for first-generation systems.\n\nFor comparison, most 3G networks in Europe operate in the 2100 MHz frequency band. For more information on worldwide GSM frequency usage, see GSM frequency bands.\n\nRegardless of the frequency selected by an operator, it is divided into timeslots for individual phones. This allows eight full-rate or sixteen half-rate speech channels per radio frequency. These eight radio timeslots (or burst periods) are grouped into a TDMA frame. Half-rate channels use alternate frames in the same timeslot. The channel data rate for all is and the frame duration is \n\nThe transmission power in the handset is limited to a maximum of 2 watts in and in .\n\nGSM has used a variety of voice codecs to squeeze 3.1 kHz audio into between 6.5 and 13 kbit/s. Originally, two codecs, named after the types of data channel they were allocated, were used, called Half Rate (6.5 kbit/s) and Full Rate (13 kbit/s). These used a system based on linear predictive coding (LPC). In addition to being efficient with bitrates, these codecs also made it easier to identify more important parts of the audio, allowing the air interface layer to prioritize and better protect these parts of the signal.\n\nAs GSM was further enhanced in 1997 with the Enhanced Full Rate (EFR) codec, a 12.2 kbit/s codec that uses a full-rate channel. Finally, with the development of UMTS, EFR was refactored into a variable-rate codec called AMR-Narrowband, which is high quality and robust against interference when used on full-rate channels, or less robust but still relatively high quality when used in good radio conditions on half-rate channel.\n\nOne of the key features of GSM is the Subscriber Identity Module, commonly known as a SIM card. The SIM is a detachable smart card containing the user's subscription information and phone book. This allows the user to retain his or her information after switching handsets. Alternatively, the user can also change operators while retaining the handset simply by changing the SIM. Some operators will block this by allowing the phone to use only a single SIM, or only a SIM issued by them; this practice is known as SIM locking.\n\nSometimes mobile network operators restrict handsets that they sell for use with their own network. This is called \"locking\" and is implemented by a software feature of the phone. A subscriber may usually contact the provider to remove the lock for a fee, utilize private services to remove the lock, or use software and websites to unlock the handset themselves. It is possible to hack past a phone locked by a network operator.\n\nIn some countries (e.g., Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Chile, Germany, Hong Kong, India, Iran, Lebanon, Malaysia, Nepal, Pakistan, Poland, Singapore, South Africa, Thailand) all phones are sold unlocked.\n\nGSM was intended to be a secure wireless system. It has considered the user authentication using a pre-shared key and challenge-response, and over-the-air encryption. However, GSM is vulnerable to different types of attack, each of them aimed at a different part of the network.\n\nThe development of UMTS introduces an optional Universal Subscriber Identity Module (USIM), that uses a longer authentication key to give greater security, as well as mutually authenticating the network and the user, whereas GSM only authenticates the user to the network (and not vice versa). The security model therefore offers confidentiality and authentication, but limited authorization capabilities, and no non-repudiation.\n\nGSM uses several cryptographic algorithms for security. The A5/1, A5/2, and A5/3 stream ciphers are used for ensuring over-the-air voice privacy. A5/1 was developed first and is a stronger algorithm used within Europe and the United States; A5/2 is weaker and used in other countries. Serious weaknesses have been found in both algorithms: it is possible to break A5/2 in real-time with a ciphertext-only attack, and in January 2007, The Hacker's Choice started the A5/1 cracking project with plans to use FPGAs that allow A5/1 to be broken with a rainbow table attack. The system supports multiple algorithms so operators may replace that cipher with a stronger one.\n\nSince 2000, different efforts have been done in order to crack the A5 encryption algorithms. Both A5/1 and A5/2 algorithms are broken, and their cryptanalysis has been considered in the literature. As an example, developed a number of rainbow tables (static values which reduce the time needed to carry out an attack) and have found new sources for known plaintext attacks. He said that it is possible to build \"a full GSM interceptor...from open-source components\" but that they had not done so because of legal concerns. Nohl claimed that he was able to intercept voice and text conversations by impersonating another user to listen to voicemail, make calls, or send text messages using a seven-year-old Motorola cellphone and decryption software available for free online.\n\nNew attacks have been observed that take advantage of poor security implementations, architecture, and development for smartphone applications. Some wiretapping and eavesdropping techniques hijack the audio input and output providing an opportunity for a third party to listen in to the conversation.\n\nGSM uses General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) for data transmissions like browsing the web. The most commonly deployed GPRS ciphers were publicly broken in 2011.\n\nThe researchers revealed flaws in the commonly used GEA/1 and GEA/2 ciphers and published the open-source \"gprsdecode\" software for sniffing GPRS networks. They also noted that some carriers do not encrypt the data (i.e., using GEA/0) in order to detect the use of traffic or protocols they do not like (e.g., Skype), leaving customers unprotected. GEA/3 seems to remain relatively hard to break and is said to be in use on some more modern networks. If used with USIM to prevent connections to fake base stations and downgrade attacks, users will be protected in the medium term, though migration to 128-bit GEA/4 is still recommended.\n\nThe GSM systems and services are described in a set of standards governed by ETSI, where a full list is maintained.\n\nSeveral open-source software projects exist that provide certain GSM features:\n\nPatents remain a problem for any open-source GSM implementation, because it is not possible for GNU or any other free software distributor to guarantee immunity from all lawsuits by the patent holders against the users. Furthermore, new features are being added to the standard all the time which means they have patent protection for a number of years.\n\nThe original GSM implementations from 1991 may now be entirely free of patent encumbrances, however patent freedom is not certain due to the United States' \"first to invent\" system that was in place until 2012. The \"first to invent\" system, coupled with \"patent term adjustment\" can extend the life of a U.S. patent far beyond 20 years from its priority date. It is unclear at this time whether OpenBTS will be able to implement features of that initial specification without limit. As patents subsequently expire, however, those features can be added into the open-source version. As of 2011, there have been no lawsuits against users of OpenBTS over GSM use.\n\n\n\n", "id": "12808", "title": "GSM"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12810", "text": "Garry Kasparov\n\nGarry Kimovich Kasparov (, ; born Garik Kimovich Weinstein, 13 April 1963) is a Russian chess grandmaster, former World Chess Champion, writer, and political activist, whom many consider to be the greatest chess player of all time. From 1986 until his retirement in 2005, Kasparov was ranked world No. 1 for 225 out of 228 months. His peak rating of 2851, achieved in 1999, was the highest recorded until being surpassed by Magnus Carlsen in 2013. Kasparov also holds records for consecutive professional tournament victories (15) and Chess Oscars (11).\n\nKasparov became the youngest ever undisputed World Chess Champion in 1985 at age 22 by defeating then-champion Anatoly Karpov. He held the official FIDE world title until 1993, when a dispute with FIDE led him to set up a rival organization, the Professional Chess Association. In 1997 he became the first world champion to lose a match to a computer under standard time controls, when he lost to the IBM supercomputer Deep Blue in a highly publicized match. He continued to hold the \"Classical\" World Chess Championship until his defeat by Vladimir Kramnik in 2000. In spite of losing the world championship, he continued winning tournaments and maintained a number-one world ranking until his retirement from professional chess.\n\nKasparov announced his retirement from professional chess on 10 March 2005, after which he devoted his time to politics and writing. He formed the United Civil Front movement, and joined as a member of The Other Russia, a coalition opposing the administration and policies of Vladimir Putin. In 2008, he announced an intention to run as a candidate in that year's Russian presidential race, but failure to find a sufficiently large rental space to assemble the number of supporters that is legally required to endorse such a candidacy led him to withdraw. Kasparov blamed \"official obstruction\" for the lack of available space. Although he is widely regarded in the West as a symbol of opposition to Putin, he was barred from the presidential ballot. The political climate in Russia reportedly makes it difficult for opposition candidates to organize.\n\nHe is currently chairman for the Human Rights Foundation and chairs its International Council. Kasparov is a frequent critic of Stephen F. Cohen, whom he describes as a Soviet and Russian apologist. Kasparov and Cohen participated in a Munk Debate in 2015 over the issue of reengaging or isolating Russia, with the audience siding with Kasparov's argument of isolating Russia. In 1997, he obtained Bosnian citizenship. In 2014, he obtained Croatian citizenship. He lives in New York City and travels often.\n\nKasparov was born Garik Kimovich Weinstein (Russian: Гарик Вайнштейн) in Baku, Azerbaijan SSR (now Azerbaijan), Soviet Union. His father, Kim Moiseyevich Weinstein, was Russian Jewish, and his mother, Klara Shagenovna Gasparian, was Armenian. Kasparov has described himself as a \"self-appointed Christian\", although \"very indifferent\".\n\nKasparov first began the serious study of chess after he came across a chess problem set up by his parents and proposed a solution. His father died of leukemia when Garry was seven years old. At the age of twelve, Garry adopted his mother's Armenian surname, Gasparian, russified as Kasparov.\n\nFrom age 7, Kasparov attended the Young Pioneer Palace in Baku and, at 10 began training at Mikhail Botvinnik's chess school under noted coach Vladimir Makogonov. Makogonov helped develop Kasparov's positional skills and taught him to play the Caro-Kann Defence and the Tartakower System of the Queen's Gambit Declined. Kasparov won the Soviet Junior Championship in Tbilisi in 1976, scoring 7 points of 9, at age 13. He repeated the feat the following year, winning with a score of 8½ of 9. He was being trained by Alexander Shakarov during this time.\n\nIn 1978, Kasparov participated in the Sokolsky Memorial tournament in Minsk. He had been invited as an exception but took first place and became a chess master. Kasparov has repeatedly said that this event was a turning point in his life, and that it convinced him to choose chess as his career. \"I will remember the Sokolsky Memorial as long as I live\", he wrote. He has also said that after the victory, he thought he had a very good shot at the World Championship.\n\nHe first qualified for the Soviet Chess Championship at age 15 in 1978, the youngest ever player at that level. He won the 64-player Swiss system tournament at Daugavpils on tiebreak over Igor V. Ivanov to capture the sole qualifying place.\n\nKasparov rose quickly through the World Chess Federation rankings. Starting with an oversight by the Russian Chess Federation, he participated in a grandmaster tournament in Banja Luka, Bosnia and Herzegovina (then part of Yugoslavia), in 1979 while still unrated (he was a replacement for Viktor Korchnoi who was originally invited but withdrew due to threat of boycott from the Soviets). Kasparov won this high-class tournament, emerging with a provisional rating of 2595, enough to catapult him to the top group of chess players (at the time, number 15 in the world)). The next year, 1980, he won the World Junior Chess Championship in Dortmund, West Germany. Later that year, he made his debut as second reserve for the Soviet Union at the Chess Olympiad at Valletta, Malta, and became a Grandmaster.\n\nAs a teenager, Kasparov tied for first place in the USSR Chess Championship in 1981–82. His first win in a superclass-level international tournament was scored at Bugojno, Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1982. He earned a place in the 1982 Moscow Interzonal tournament, which he won, to qualify for the Candidates Tournament. At age 19, he was the youngest Candidate since Bobby Fischer, who was 15 when he qualified in 1958. At this stage, he was already the No. 2-rated player in the world, trailing only World Chess Champion Anatoly Karpov on the January 1983 list.\n\nKasparov's first (quarter-final) Candidates match was against Alexander Beliavsky, whom he defeated 6–3 (four wins, one loss). Politics threatened Kasparov's semi-final against Viktor Korchnoi, which was scheduled to be played in Pasadena, California. Korchnoi had defected from the Soviet Union in 1976, and was at that time the strongest active non-Soviet player. Various political maneuvers prevented Kasparov from playing Korchnoi, and Kasparov forfeited the match. This was resolved by Korchnoi allowing the match to be replayed in London, along with the previously scheduled match between Vasily Smyslov and Zoltán Ribli. The Kasparov-Korchnoi match was put together on short notice by Raymond Keene. Kasparov lost the first game but won the match 7–4 (four wins, one loss).\n\nIn January 1984, Kasparov became the No. 1 ranked player in the world, with a FIDE rating of 2710. He became the youngest ever world No. 1, a record that lasted 12 years until being broken by Vladimir Kramnik in January 1996; the record is currently held by Magnus Carlsen.\n\nLater in 1984, he won the Candidates' final 8½–4½ (four wins, no losses) against the resurgent former world champion Vasily Smyslov, at Vilnius, thus qualifying to play Anatoly Karpov for the World Championship. That year he joined the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU), as a member of which he was elected to the Central Committee of Komsomol in 1987.\n\nThe World Chess Championship 1984 match between Anatoly Karpov and Garry Kasparov had many ups and downs, and a very controversial finish. Karpov started in very good form, and after nine games Kasparov was down 4–0 in a \"first to six wins\" match. Fellow players predicted he would be whitewashed 6–0 within 18 games.\n\nIn an unexpected turn of events, there followed a series of 17 successive draws, some relatively short, and others drawn in unsettled positions. Kasparov lost game 27, then fought back with another series of draws until game 32, his first-ever win against the World Champion. Another 14 successive draws followed, through game 46; the previous record length for a world title match had been 34 games, the match of José Raúl Capablanca vs. Alexander Alekhine in 1927.\n\nKasparov won games 47 and 48 to bring the scores to 5–3 in Karpov's favour. Then the match was ended without result by Florencio Campomanes, the President of Fédération Internationale des Échecs (FIDE), and a new match was announced to start a few months later. The termination was controversial, as both players stated that they preferred the match to continue. Announcing his decision at a press conference, Campomanes cited the health of the players, which had been strained by the length of the match.\n\nThe match became the first, and so far only, world championship match to be abandoned without result. Kasparov's relations with Campomanes and FIDE were greatly strained, and the feud between them finally came to a head in 1993 with Kasparov's complete break-away from FIDE.\n\nThe second Karpov-Kasparov match in 1985 was organized in Moscow as the best of 24 games where the first player to win 12½ points would claim the World Champion title. The scores from the terminated match would not carry over; however, in the event of a 12–12 draw, the title would remain with Karpov. On 9 November 1985, Kasparov secured the title by a score of 13–11, winning the 24th game with Black, using a Sicilian defense. He was 22 years old at the time, making him the youngest ever World Champion, and breaking the record held by Mikhail Tal for over 20 years. Kasparov's win as Black in the 16th game has been recognized as one of the all-time masterpieces in chess history.\n\nAs part of the arrangements following the aborted 1984 match, Karpov had been granted (in the event of his defeat) a right to rematch. Another match took place in 1986, hosted jointly in London and Leningrad, with each city hosting 12 games. At one point in the match, Kasparov opened a three-point lead and looked well on his way to a decisive match victory. But Karpov fought back by winning three consecutive games to level the score late in the match. At this point, Kasparov dismissed one of his seconds, grandmaster Evgeny Vladimirov, accusing him of selling his opening preparation to the Karpov team (as described in Kasparov's autobiography \"Unlimited Challenge\", chapter Stab in the Back). Kasparov scored one more win and kept his title by a final score of 12½–11½.\n\nA fourth match for the world title took place in 1987 in Seville, as Karpov had qualified through the Candidates' Matches to again become the official challenger. This match was very close, with neither player holding more than a one-point lead at any time during the contest. Kasparov was down one full point at the time of the final game, and needed a win to draw the match and retain his title. A long tense game ensued in which Karpov blundered away a pawn just before the first time control, and Kasparov eventually won a long ending. Kasparov retained his title as the match was drawn by a score of 12–12. (All this meant that Kasparov had played Karpov four times in the period 1984–87, a statistic unprecedented in chess. Matches organized by FIDE had taken place every three years since 1948, and only Botvinnik had a right to a rematch before Karpov.)\n\nA fifth match between Kasparov and Karpov was held in New York and Lyon in 1990, with each city hosting 12 games. Again, the result was a close one with Kasparov winning by a margin of 12½–11½. In their five world championship matches, Kasparov had 21 wins, 19 losses, and 104 draws in 144 games.\n\nWith the World Champion title in hand, Kasparov began opposing FIDE. Beginning in 1986, he created the Grandmasters Association (GMA), an organization to represent professional chess players and give them more say in FIDE's activities. Kasparov assumed a leadership role. GMA's major achievement was in organizing a series of six World Cup tournaments for the world's top players. A somewhat uneasy relationship developed with FIDE, and a sort of truce was brokered by Bessel Kok, a Dutch businessman.\n\nThis stand-off lasted until 1993, by which time a new challenger had qualified through the Candidates cycle for Kasparov's next World Championship defense: Nigel Short, a British grandmaster who had defeated Anatoly Karpov in a qualifying match, and then Jan Timman in the finals held in early 1993. After a confusing and compressed bidding process produced lower financial estimates than expected, the world champion and his challenger decided to play outside FIDE's jurisdiction, under another organization created by Kasparov called the Professional Chess Association (PCA). This is where a great fracture occurred in the lineage of the FIDE version of the World Champions tradition.\n\nIn an interview in 2007, Kasparov called the break with FIDE the worst mistake of his career, as it hurt the game in the long run.\n\nKasparov and Short were ejected from FIDE, and played their well-sponsored match in London. Kasparov won convincingly by a score of 12½–7½. The match considerably raised the profile of chess in the UK, with an unprecedented level of coverage on Channel 4. Meanwhile, FIDE organized a World Championship match between Jan Timman (the defeated Candidates finalist) and former World Champion Karpov (a defeated Candidates semifinalist), which Karpov won.\n\nFIDE removed Kasparov and Short from the FIDE rating lists. Thus, till this was in effect, there was a parallel rating list presented by PCA which featured all world top players, regardless of their relation to FIDE.\n\nThere were now two World Champions: PCA champion Kasparov, and FIDE champion Karpov. The title remained split for 13 years.\n\nKasparov defended his title in a 1995 match against Viswanathan Anand at the World Trade Center in New York City. Kasparov won the match by four wins to one, with thirteen draws. It was the last World Championship to be held under the auspices of the PCA, which collapsed when Intel, one of its major backers, withdrew its sponsorship.\n\nKasparov tried to organize another World Championship match, under another organization, the World Chess Association (WCA) with Linares organizer Luis Rentero. Alexei Shirov and Vladimir Kramnik played a candidates match to decide the challenger, which Shirov won in a surprising upset. But when Rentero admitted that the funds required and promised had never materialized, the WCA collapsed.\n\nThis left Kasparov stranded, and yet another organization stepped in—BrainGames.com, headed by Raymond Keene. No match against Shirov was arranged, and talks with Anand collapsed, so a match was instead arranged against Kramnik.\n\nDuring this period, Kasparov was approached by Oakham School in the United Kingdom, at the time the only school in the country with a full-time chess coach, and developed an interest in the use of chess in education. In 1997, Kasparov supported a scholarship programme at the school. Kasparov also won the Marca Leyenda trophy that year.\n\nThe Kasparov-Kramnik match took place in London during the latter half of 2000. Kramnik had been a student of Kasparov's at the famous Botvinnik/Kasparov chess school in Russia, and had served on Kasparov's team for the 1995 match against Viswanathan Anand.\n\nThe better-prepared Kramnik won game 2 against Kasparov's Grünfeld Defence and achieved winning positions in Games 4 and 6, although Kasparov held the draw in both games. Kasparov made a critical error in Game 10 with the Nimzo-Indian Defence, which Kramnik exploited to win in 25 moves. As White, Kasparov could not crack the passive but solid Berlin Defence in the Ruy Lopez, and Kramnik successfully drew all his games as Black. Kramnik won the match 8½–6½. Kasparov became the first player to lose a world championship match without winning a game since Emanuel Lasker lost to José Raúl Capablanca in 1921.\n\nAfter losing the title, Kasparov won a series of major tournaments, and remained the top rated player in the world, ahead of both Kramnik and the FIDE World Champions. In 2001 he refused an invitation to the 2002 Dortmund Candidates Tournament for the Classical title, claiming his results had earned him a rematch with Kramnik.\n\nKasparov and Karpov played a four-game match with rapid time controls over two days in December 2002 in New York City. Karpov surprised the experts and emerged victoriously, winning two games and drawing one.\n\nDue to Kasparov's continuing strong results, and status as world No. 1 in much of the public eye, he was included in the so-called \"Prague Agreement\", masterminded by Yasser Seirawan and intended to reunite the two World Championships. Kasparov was to play a match against the FIDE World Champion Ruslan Ponomariov in September 2003. But this match was called off after Ponomariov refused to sign his contract for it without reservation. In its place, there were plans for a match against Rustam Kasimdzhanov, winner of the FIDE World Chess Championship 2004, to be held in January 2005 in the United Arab Emirates. These also fell through due to lack of funding. Plans to hold the match in Turkey instead came too late. Kasparov announced in January 2005 that he was tired of waiting for FIDE to organize a match and so had decided to stop all efforts to regain the World Championship title.\n\nAfter winning the prestigious Linares tournament for the ninth time, Kasparov announced on 10 March 2005 that he would retire from serious competitive chess. He cited as the reason a lack of personal goals in the chess world (he commented when winning the Russian championship in 2004 that it had been the last major title he had never won outright) and expressed frustration at the failure to reunify the world championship.\n\nKasparov said he may play in some rapid chess events for fun, but intends to spend more time on his books, including both the \"My Great Predecessors\" series (see below) and a work on the links between decision-making in chess and in other areas of life, and will continue to involve himself in Russian politics, which he views as \"headed down the wrong path\".\n\nKasparov has been married three times: to Masha, with whom he had a daughter before divorcing; to Yulia, with whom he had a son before their 2005 divorce; and to Daria (Dasha), with whom he has two children.\n\nOn 22 August 2006, in his first public chess games since his retirement, Kasparov played in the Lichthof Chess Champions Tournament, a blitz event played at the time control of 5 minutes per side and 3 second increments per move. Kasparov tied for first with Anatoly Karpov, scoring 4½/6.\n\nGarry Kasparov and Anatoly Karpov played a 12-game match from 21–24 September 2009, in Valencia, Spain. It consisted of four rapid (or semi rapid) games, in which Kasparov won 3–1, and eight blitz games, in which Kasparov won 6–2, winning the match with total result 9–3. The event took place exactly 25 years after the two players' legendary encounter at World Chess Championship 1984.\n\nKasparov actively coached Magnus Carlsen for approximately one year beginning in February 2009. The collaboration remained secret until September 2009. Under Kasparov's tutelage, Carlsen in October 2009 became the youngest ever to achieve a FIDE rating higher than 2800, and rose from world number four to world number one. While the pair initially planned to work together throughout 2010, in March of that year it was announced that Carlsen had split from Kasparov and would no longer be using him as a trainer. According to an interview with the German magazine \"Der Spiegel\", Carlsen indicated that he would remain in contact and that he would continue to attend training sessions with Kasparov, but in fact no further training sessions were held and the cooperation gradually fizzled over the course of the spring.\n\nIn May 2010 it was revealed that Kasparov had aided Viswanathan Anand in preparation for the World Chess Championship 2010 against challenger Veselin Topalov. Anand won the match 6½–5½ to retain the title.\n\nAlso in May 2010 he played 30 games simultaneously, winning each one, against players at Tel-Aviv University in Israel.\n\nIn January 2011, Kasparov began training the American grandmaster Hikaru Nakamura. The first of several training sessions was held in New York just prior to Nakamura's participation in the Tata Steel Chess tournament in Wijk aan Zee, the Netherlands. In December 2011, it was announced that the cooperation had come to an end.\n\nKasparov played two blitz exhibition matches in the autumn of 2011. The first, in September against French grandmaster Maxime Vachier-Lagrave, in Clichy (France), which Kasparov won 1½–½. The second was a longer match consisting of eight blitz games played on 9 October, against English grandmaster Nigel Short. Kasparov won again by a score of 4½–3½.\n\nA little after that, in October 2011, Kasparov played and defeated fourteen opponents in a simultaneous exhibition that took place in Bratislava.\n\nOn April 25 and 26, 2015, Kasparov played a mini-match against Nigel Short. The match consisted of two rapid games and eight blitz games. Kasparov won the match decisively with a score of 8½–1½, winning all five games on the second day.\n\nOn Wednesday August 19, 2015 he played and won the 19 games of a simultaneous exhibition in Pula, Croatia.\n\nOn Thursday 28 April and Friday 29 April 2016 at the Chess Club and Scholastic Center of Saint Louis, Kasparov played a 6-round exhibition blitz round-robin tournament with Fabiano Caruana, Wesley So, and Hikaru Nakamura in an event called the Ultimate Blitz Challenge. He finished the tournament third with 9.5/18, behind Hikaru Nakamura (11/18) and Wesley So (10/18). At the post-tournament interview, he considered the possibility of playing future top-level blitz exhibition matches.\n\nOn June 2, 2016 Kasparov played against fifteen chess players in a simultaneous exhibition in the of Mönchengladbach. He won all games.\n\nThe Ultimate Blitz Challenge, a special exhibition tournament, was held on Thursday 28 April and Friday 29 April 2016 at the Chess Club and Scholastic Center of Saint Louis.\n\nFor the first time since his retirement in 2005 Garry Kasparov played chess against some of the top chess players in the world.\n\nHe played the top three finishers of the 2016 U.S. Chess Championship in an unrated blitz tournament. This turned out to be the top three seeds, Fabiano Caruana, Wesley So, and Hikaru Nakamura.\n\nFor the first time in 11 years, Garry Kasparov played against three players from the current top 10 (if we take the April 2016 FIDE rating list for classical chess).\n\n\nOn 7 October 2013 Kasparov announced his candidacy for World Chess Federation president during a reception in Tallinn, Estonia, where the 84th FIDE Congress took place. Kasparov's candidacy was supported by his former student, reigning World Chess Champion and FIDE #1 ranked player Magnus Carlsen. At the FIDE General Assembly in August 2014, Kasparov lost the presidential election to incumbent FIDE president Kirsan Ilyumzhinov, with a vote of 110-61.\n\nA few days before the election took place, the \"New York Times Magazine\" had published a lengthy report on the viciously fought campaign. Included was information about a leaked contract between Kasparov and former FIDE Secretary General Ignatius Leong from Singapore, in which the Kasparov campaign reportedly \"offered to pay Leong $500,000 and to pay $250,000 a year for four years to the Asean Chess Academy, an organization Leong helped create to teach the game, specifying that Leong would be responsible for delivering 11 votes from his region [...]\". In September 2015 the FIDE Ethics Commission found Kasparov and Leong guilty of violating its Code of Ethics and later suspended them for two years from all FIDE functions and meetings.\n\n(Rapid, blitz and blindfold games not included; listed as +wins −losses =draws as of 2 May 2014.)<br>\n\nKasparov joined the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) in 1984, which was mandatory at the time, and in 1987 was elected to the Central Committee of Komsomol. But in 1990 he left the party and together with his family fled from Baku to Moscow on a chartered plane when pogroms against Armenians in Baku took place forcing thousands of ethnic Armenians to flee Azerbaijan.\n\nIn 1991, Kasparov received the Keeper of the Flame award from the Center for Security Policy for \"propagation of democracy and the respect for individual rights throughout the world\". In his acceptance speech Kasparov lauded the defeat of communism while also urging the United States to give no financial assistance to central Soviet leaders.\n\nIn May Kasparov took part in the creation of the Democratic Party of Russia, which at first was a liberal anti-communist party, later shifted to centrism. Kasparov was in June 1993 involved with the creation of the \"Choice of Russia\" bloc of parties and in 1996 took part in the election campaign of Boris Yeltsin. In 2001 he voiced his support for the Russian television channel NTV.\n\nIn April 2007, it was asserted that Kasparov was a board member of the National Security Advisory Council of Center for Security Policy, a \"non-profit, non-partisan national security organization [in Washington, DC] that specializes in identifying policies, actions, and resource needs that are vital to American security\". Kasparov confirmed this and added that he was removed shortly after he became aware of it. He noted that he did not know about the membership and suggested he was included in the board by accident because he received the 1991 Keeper of the Flame award from this organization. But Kasparov maintained his association with the leadership by giving speeches at think tanks such as the Hoover Institution.\n\nAfter his retirement from chess in 2005, Kasparov turned to politics and created the United Civil Front, a social movement whose main goal is to \"work to preserve electoral democracy in Russia\". He has vowed to \"restore democracy\" to Russia by restoring the rule of law.\n\nKasparov was instrumental in setting up The Other Russia, a coalition which opposes Putin's government. The Other Russia has been boycotted by the leaders of Russia's mainstream opposition parties, Yabloko and Union of Rightist Forces due to its inclusion of nationalist and radical groups. Kasparov has criticized these groups as being secretly under the auspices of the Kremlin.\n\nOn 10 April 2005, Kasparov was in Moscow at a promotional event when he was struck over the head with a chessboard he had just signed. The assailant was reported to have said \"I admired you as a chess player, but you gave that up for politics\" immediately before the attack. Kasparov has been the subject of a number of other episodes since, including police brutality and allegedly harassment from the Russian secret service.\n\nKasparov helped organize the Saint Petersburg Dissenters' March on 3 March 2007 and The March of the Dissenters on 24 March 2007, both involving several thousand people rallying against Putin and Saint Petersburg Governor Valentina Matviyenko's policies.\n\nOn 14 April 2007, Kasparov led a pro-democracy demonstration in Moscow. Soon after the demonstration's start, however, over 9,000 police descended on the group and seized almost everyone. Kasparov, who was briefly arrested by the Moscow police, was warned by the prosecution office on the eve of the march that anyone participating risked being detained. He was held for some 10 hours and then fined and released. He was later summoned by the FSB for violations of Russian anti-extremism laws.\n\nSpeaking about Kasparov, former KGB general Oleg Kalugin in 2007 remarked, \"I do not talk in details—people who knew them are all dead now because they were vocal, they were open. I am quiet. There is only one man who is vocal and he may be in trouble: [former] world chess champion [Garry] Kasparov. He has been very outspoken in his attacks on Putin and I believe that he is probably next on the list.\"\n\nOn 30 September 2007, Kasparov entered the Russian Presidential race, receiving 379 of 498 votes at a congress held in Moscow by The Other Russia.\n\nIn October 2007, Kasparov announced his intention of standing for the Russian presidency as the candidate of the \"Other Russia\" coalition and vowed to fight for a \"democratic and just Russia\". Later that month he traveled to the United States, where he appeared on several popular television programs, which were hosted by Stephen Colbert, Wolf Blitzer, Bill Maher, and Chris Matthews.\n\nOn 24 November 2007, Kasparov and other protesters were detained by police at an Other Russia rally in Moscow. 3,000 demonstrators arrived to protest the seemingly rigged elections, since most of the candidates would be running unopposed. Following an attempt by about 100 protesters to march through police lines to the electoral commission, which had barred Other Russia candidates from parliamentary elections, arrests were made. The Russian authorities stated a rally had been approved but not any marches, resulting in several detained demonstrators. He was subsequently charged with resisting arrest and organizing an unauthorized protest and given a jail sentence of five days. Kasparov appealed the charges, citing that he had been following orders given by the police, although it was denied. He was released from jail on 29 November. Putin criticized Kasparov at the rally for his use of English when speaking rather than Russian.\n\nOn 12 December 2007, Kasparov announced that he had to withdraw his presidential candidacy due to inability to rent a meeting hall where at least 500 of his supporters could assemble. With the deadline expiring on that date, he explained it was impossible for him to run. Russian election laws required sufficient meeting hall space for assembling supporters. Kasparov's spokeswoman accused the government of using pressure to deter anyone from renting a hall for the gathering and said that the electoral commission had rejected a proposal that would have allowed for smaller gathering sizes rather than one large gathering at a meeting hall.\n\nKasparov was among the 34 first signatories and a key organizer of the online anti-Putin campaign \"Putin must go\", started on 10 March 2010. The campaign was begun by a coalition of opposition to Putin who regard his rule as lacking any rule of law. Within the text is a call to Russian law enforcement to ignore Putin's orders. By June 2011 there were 90,000 signatures. While the identity of the petition author remained anonymous, there was wide speculation that it was indeed Kasparov.\n\nKasparov was named Chairman of the Human Rights Foundation in 2011, succeeding the recently deceased author, activist, and former Czech president Václav Havel. On 31 January 2012 Kasparov hosted a meeting of opposition leaders planning a mass march on 4 February 2012, the third major opposition rally held since the disputed State Duma elections of December 2011. Among other opposition leaders attending were Alexey Navalny and Yevgenia Chirikova.\n\nOn 17 August 2012 Kasparov was arrested and beaten outside of the Moscow court while attending the verdict reading in the case involving the all-female punk band Pussy Riot. On 24 August he was cleared of charges that he took part in an unauthorized protest against the conviction of three members of Pussy Riot. Judge Yekaterina Veklich said there were \"no grounds to believe the testimony of the police.\" He could still face criminal charges over a police officer's claims that the opposition leader bit his finger while he was being detained. He later thanked all the bloggers and reporters who provided video evidence that contradicted the testimony of the police.\n\nKasparov wrote in February 2013 that \"fascism has come to Russia...Project Putin, just like the old Project Hitler, is but the fruit of a conspiracy by the ruling elite. Fascist rule was never the result of the free will of the people. It was always the fruit of a conspiracy by the ruling elites!\"\n\nIn April 2013, Kasparov joined in an HRF condemnation of Kanye West for having performed for the leader of Kazakhstan in exchange for a $3 million paycheck, saying that West \"has entertained a brutal killer and his entourage\" and that his fee \"came from the loot stolen from the Kazakhstan treasury.\"\n\nKasparov denied rumors in April 2013 that he planned to leave Russia for good. \"I found these rumors to be deeply saddening and, moreover, surprising,\" he wrote. \"I was unable to respond immediately because I was in such a state of shock that such an incredibly inaccurate statement, the likes of which is constantly distributed by the Kremlin’s propagandists, came this time from Ilya Yashin, a fellow member of the Opposition Coordination Council (KSO) and my former colleague from the Solidarity movement.\"\n\nIn an April 2013 op-ed piece, Kasparov accused prominent Russian journalist Vladimir Posner of failing to stand up to Putin and to earlier Russian and Soviet leaders.\n\nKasparov was presented with the Morris B. Abram Human Rights Award, UN Watch's annual human-rights prize, in 2013. The organization praised him as \"not only one of the world’s smartest men\" but \"also among its bravest.\"\n\nAt the 2013 Women in the World conference, Kasparov told the \"Daily Beast\"'s Michael Moynihan that democracy no longer existed in what he called Russia's \"dictatorship.\"\n\nKasparov said at a press conference in June 2013 that if he returned to Russia he doubted he would be allowed to leave again, given Putin's ongoing crackdown against dissenters. \"So for the time being,\" he said, \"I refrain from returning to Russia.\" He explained shortly thereafter in an article for the \"Daily Beast\" that this had not been intended as \"a declaration of leaving my home country, permanently or otherwise,\" but merely an expression of \"the dark reality of the situation in Russia today, where nearly half the members of the opposition’s Coordinating Council are under criminal investigation on concocted charges.\" He noted that the Moscow prosecutor’s office was \"opening an investigation that would limit my ability to travel,\" making it impossible for him to fulfill \"professional speaking engagements\" and hindering his \"work for the nonprofit Kasparov Chess Foundation, which has centers in New York City, Brussels, and Johannesburg to promote chess in education.\"\n\nKasparov further wrote in his June 2013 \"Daily Beast\" article that the mass protests in Moscow 18 months earlier against fraudulent Russian elections had been \"a proud moment for me.\" He recalled that after joining the opposition movement in March 2005, he had been criticized for seeking to unite \"every anti-Putin element in the country to march together regardless of ideology.\" Therefore, the sight of \"hundreds of flags representing every group from liberals to nationalists all marching together for 'Russia Without Putin' was the fulfillment of a dream.\" Yet most Russians, he lamented, had continued to \"slumber\" even as Putin had \"taken off the flimsy mask of democracy to reveal himself in full as the would-be KGB dictator he has always been.\"\n\nKasparov responded with several sardonic Twitter postings to a September 2013 \"New York Times\" op-ed by Putin. \"I hope Putin has taken adequate protections,\" he tweeted. \"Now that he is a Russian journalist his life may be in grave danger!\" Also: \"Now we can expect NY Times op-eds by Mugabe on fair elections, Castro on free speech, & Kim Jong-un on prison reform. The Axis of Hypocrisy.\"\n\nIn a 12 May 2013, op-ed for the \"Wall Street Journal\", Kasparov questioned reports that the Russian security agency, the FSB, had fully cooperated with the FBI in the matter of the Boston bombers. He noted that the elder bomber, Tamerlan Tsarnaev, had reportedly met in Russia with two known jihadists who \"were killed in Dagestan by the Russian military just days before Tamerlan left Russia for the U.S.\" Kasparov argued, \"If no intelligence was sent from Moscow to Washington\" about this meeting, \"all this talk of FSB cooperation cannot be taken seriously.\" He further observed, \"This would not be the first time Russian security forces seemed strangely impotent in the face of an impending terror attack,\" pointing out that in both the 2002 Moscow theater siege and the 2004 Beslan school attack, \"there were FSB informants in both terror groups—yet the attacks went ahead unimpeded.\" Given this history, he wrote, \"it is impossible to overlook that the Boston bombing took place just days after the U.S. Magnitsky List was published, creating the first serious external threat to the Putin power structure by penalizing Russian officials complicit in human-rights crimes.\" In sum, Putin's \"dubious record on counterterrorism and its continued support of terror sponsors Iran and Syria mean only one thing: common ground zero.\"\n\nKasparov wrote in July 2013 about the trial in Kirov of fellow opposition leader Alexei Navalny, who had been convicted \"on concocted embezzlement charges,\" only to see the prosecutor, surprisingly, ask for his release the next day pending appeal. \"The judicial process and the democratic process in Russia,\" wrote Kasparov, \"are both elaborate mockeries created to distract the citizenry at home and to help Western leaders avoid confronting the awkward fact that Russia has returned to a police state.\" Still, Kasparov felt that whatever had caused the Kirov prosecutor's about-face, \"my optimism tells me it was a positive sign. After more than 13 years of predictable repression under Putin, anything different is good.\"\n\nKasparov wrote in \"Time\" on 18 September 2013 that he considered the \"chess metaphors thrown around during the world’s response to the civil war in Syria\" to be \"trite\" and rejected what he called \"all the nonsense about 'Putin is playing chess and Obama is playing checkers,' or tic-tac-toe or whatever.\" Putin, argued Kasparov, \"did not have to outplay or outthink anyone. He and Bashar Assad won by forfeit when President Obama, Prime Minister Cameron and the rest of the so-called leaders of the free world walked away from the table.\" There is, he lamented, \"a new game at the negotiating table where Putin and Assad set the rules and will run the show under the protection of the U.N.\" Kasparov said in September 2013 that Russia was now a dictatorship. In the same month he told an interviewer that \"Obama going to Russia now is dead wrong, morally and politically,\" because Putin's regime \"is behind Assad.\"\n\nKasparov maintains a summer home in the Croatian city of Makarska. In early February 2014, Kasparov applied for citizenship by naturalisation in Croatia, adding that he was finding it increasingly difficult to live in Russia. According to an article in \"The Guardian\", Kasparov is \"widely perceived\" as having been a vocal supporter of Croatian independence during the early 1990s. On 28 February 2014, his application for naturalisation was approved, and he is now a Croatian passport holder.\n\nKasparov spoke out several times about Putin's antigay laws and the proposed Sochi Olympics boycott. He explained in August 2013 that he had opposed Russia’s bid from the outset, since hosting the Olympics would \"allow Vladimir Putin’s cronies to embezzle hundreds of millions of dollars\" and \"lend prestige to Putin’s authoritarian regime.\" Kasparov added that Putin's anti-gay law was \"only the most recent encroachment on the freedom of speech and association of Russia’s citizens,\" which the international community had largely ignored. Instead of supporting a games boycott, which would \"unfairly punish athletes,\" Kasparov called for athletes and others to \"transform Putin’s self-congratulatory pet project into a spotlight that exposes his authoritarian rule for the entire world to see.\" In September, Kasparov expanded on his remarks, saying that \"forcing athletes to play a political role against their will is not fair\" and that politicians should not \"hide behind athletes.\" Instead of boycotting Sochi, he suggested, politicians should refuse to attend the games and the public should \"put pressure on the sponsors and the media.\" Coca-Cola, for example, could put \"a rainbow flag on each Coca-Cola can\" and NBC could \"do interviews with Russian gay activists or with Russian political activists.\" Kasparov also emphasized that although he was \"still a Russian citizen,\" he had \"good reason to be concerned about my ability to leave Russia if I returned to Moscow.\"\n\nKasparov has spoken out against the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea and has stated that control of Crimea should be returned to Ukraine after the overthrow of Vladimir Putin without additional conditions.\n\nKasparov's website was blocked by the Russian federative regulator, Roskomnadzor, at the behest of the public prosecutor, allegedly due to Kasparov's opinions of the Crimean crisis. Kasparov's block was made in unison with several other notable Russian sites that were accused of inciting public outrage. Reportedly, several of the blocked sites received an affidavit noting their violations. However, Kasparov stated that his site had received no such notice of violations after its block.\n\nIn October 2015, Kasparov published a book titled \"Winter Is Coming: Why Vladimir Putin and the Enemies of the Free World Must Be Stopped\". In the book, Kasparov likens Putin to Hitler, and explains the need for the west to oppose Putin sooner, rather than appeasing him and postponing the eventual confrontation. According to his publisher, \"Kasparov wants this book out fast, in a way that has potential to influence the discussion during the primary season.\"\n\nIn the United States presidential election, 2016, Kasparov described Republican front-runner Donald Trump as \"a celebrity showman with racist leanings and authoritarian tendencies,\" and criticised Trump for calling for closer ties with Vladimir Putin, and responded to Trump's running mate, Mike Pence, calling Putin a strong leader, that Putin is a strong leader \"in the same way arsenic is a strong drink\". He also criticised the economic policies of Democratic candidate Bernie Sanders, but showed respect for Sanders as \"a charismatic speaker and a passionate believer in his cause.\"\n\nKasparov's style of play has been compared by many to Alekhine's. Kasparov has described his style as being influenced chiefly by Alekhine, Tal and Fischer. Kramnik has opined that \"[Kasparov's] capacity for study is second to none\", and said \"There is nothing in chess he has been unable to deal with.\" Carlsen, whom Kasparov coached from 2009 to 2010, said of Kasparov, \"I've never seen someone with such a feel for dynamics in complex positions.\" Kasparov was known for his extensive opening preparation and aggressive play in the opening.\n\nKasparov played in a total of eight Chess Olympiads. He represented the Soviet Union four times and Russia four times, following the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991. In his 1980 Olympiad debut, he became, at age 17, the youngest player to represent the Soviet Union or Russia at that level, a record which was broken by Vladimir Kramnik in 1992. In 82 games, he has scored (+50 −3 =29), for 78.7% and won a total of 19 medals, including team gold medals all eight times he competed. For the 1994 Moscow Olympiad, he had a significant organizational role, in helping to put together the event on short notice, after Thessaloniki canceled its offer to host, a few weeks before the scheduled dates. Kasparov's detailed Olympiad record follows:\n\nKasparov made his international teams debut for the USSR at age 16 in the 1980 European Team Championship and played for Russia in the 1992 edition of that championship. He won a total of five medals. His detailed Euroteams record, from, follows.\n\nKasparov also represented the USSR once in Youth Olympiad competition, but the detailed data at Olimpbase is incomplete; the Chessmetrics Garry Kasparov player file has his individual score from that event.\n\nKasparov holds the record for the longest time as the No. 1 rated player in the world—from 1986 to 2005 (Vladimir Kramnik shared the No. 1 ranking with him once, in the January 1996 FIDE rating list). He was also briefly ejected from the list following his split from FIDE in 1993, but during that time he headed the rating list of the rival PCA. At the time of his retirement, he was still ranked No. 1 in the world, with a rating of 2812. His rating has fallen inactive since the January 2006 rating list.\n\nIn January 1990 Kasparov achieved the (then) highest FIDE rating ever, passing 2800 and breaking Bobby Fischer's old record of 2785. By the July 1999 and January 2000 FIDE rating lists, Kasparov had reached a 2851 Elo rating, at that time the highest rating ever achieved. He held that record for the highest rating ever achieved until Magnus Carlsen attained a new record high rating of 2861 in January 2013. According to the unofficial Chessmetrics calculations, Kasparov was the highest rated player in the world continuously from February 1985 until October 2004. He also holds the highest all-time average rating over a 2 (2877) to 20 (2856) year period and is second to only Bobby Fischer's (2881 vs 2879) over a one-year period.\n\nKasparov holds the record for most consecutive professional tournament victories, placing first or equal first in 15 individual tournaments from 1981 to 1990. The streak was broken by Vasily Ivanchuk at Linares 1991, where Kasparov placed 2nd, half a point behind him. The details of this record winning streak follow:\n\nKasparov won the Chess Oscar a record eleven times.\n\nKasparov has written books on chess. He published a controversial autobiography when still in his early 20s, originally titled \"Child of Change\", later retitled \"Unlimited Challenge\". This book was subsequently updated several times after he became World Champion. Its content is mainly literary, with a small chess component of key unannotated games. He published an annotated games collection in 1985: \"Fighting Chess: My Games and Career\" and this book has also been updated several times in further editions. He also wrote a book annotating the games from his World Chess Championship 1985 victory, \"World Chess Championship Match: Moscow, 1985\".\n\nHe has annotated his own games extensively for the Yugoslav \"Chess Informant\" series and for other chess publications. In 1982, he co-authored \"Batsford Chess Openings\" with British grandmaster Raymond Keene and this book was an enormous seller. It was updated into a second edition in 1989. He also co-authored two opening books with his trainer Alexander Nikitin in the 1980s for British publisher Batsford—on the Classical Variation of the Caro-Kann Defence and on the Scheveningen Variation of the Sicilian Defence. Kasparov has also contributed extensively to the five-volume openings series \"Encyclopedia of Chess Openings\".\n\nIn 2000, Kasparov co-authored \"Kasparov Against the World: The Story of the Greatest Online Challenge\" with grandmaster Daniel King. The 202-page book analyzes the 1999 Kasparov versus the World game, and holds the record for the longest analysis devoted to a single chess game.\n\nKasparov has written in support of New Chronology (Fomenko), although with some reservations.\n\nIn 2003, the first volume of his five-volume work \"Garry Kasparov on My Great Predecessors\" was published. This volume, which deals with the world chess champions Wilhelm Steinitz, Emanuel Lasker, José Raúl Capablanca, Alexander Alekhine, and some of their strong contemporaries, has received lavish praise from some reviewers (including Nigel Short), while attracting criticism from others for historical inaccuracies and analysis of games directly copied from unattributed sources. Through suggestions on the book's website, most of these shortcomings were corrected in following editions and translations. Despite this, the first volume won the British Chess Federation's Book of the Year award in 2003. Volume two, covering Max Euwe, Mikhail Botvinnik, Vasily Smyslov and Mikhail Tal appeared later in 2003. Volume three, covering Tigran Petrosian and Boris Spassky appeared in early 2004. In December 2004, Kasparov released volume four, which covers Samuel Reshevsky, Miguel Najdorf, and Bent Larsen (none of these three were World Champions), but focuses primarily on Bobby Fischer. The fifth volume, devoted to the chess careers of World Champion Anatoly Karpov and challenger Viktor Korchnoi, was published in March 2006.\n\nHis book \"Revolution in the 70s\" (published in March 2007) covers \"the openings revolution of the 1970s–1980s\" and is the first book in a new series called \"Modern Chess Series\", which intends to cover his matches with Karpov and selected games. The book \"Revolution in the 70s\" concerns the revolution in opening theory that was witnessed in that decade. Such systems as the controversial (at the time) \"Hedgehog\" opening plan of passively developing the pieces no further than the first three ranks are examined in great detail. Kasparov also analyzes some of the most notable games played in that period. In a section at the end of the book, top opening theoreticians provide their own \"take\" on the progress made in opening theory in the 1980s.\n\nKasparov is publishing three volumes of his games.\n\nIn 2007 he wrote \"How Life Imitates Chess\", an examination of the parallels between decision-making in chess and in the business world.\n\nIn 2008 Kasparov published a sympathetic obituary for Bobby Fischer, writing: \"I am often asked if I ever met or played Bobby Fischer. The answer is no, I never had that opportunity. But even though he saw me as a member of the evil chess establishment that he felt had robbed and cheated him, I am sorry I never had a chance to thank him personally for what he did for our sport.\"\n\nHe is the chief advisor for the book publisher Everyman Chess.\n\nKasparov works closely with Mig Greengard and his comments can often be found on Greengard's blog (apparently no longer active).\n\nKasparov collaborated with Max Levchin and Peter Thiel on \"The Blueprint\", a book calling for a revival of world innovation, released in March 2013 from W. W. Norton & Company.\n\nIn October 2015, Kasparov published a book titled \"Winter Is Coming: Why Vladimir Putin and the Enemies of the Free World Must Be Stopped\". The title is a reference to the HBO television series \"Game of Thrones\".\n\n\nKasparov played against thirty-two different chess computers in Hamburg, winning all games, but with some difficulty.\n\nKasparov defeated the chess computer Deep Thought in both games of a two-game match in 1989.\n\nIn February 1996, IBM's chess computer Deep Blue defeated Kasparov in one game using normal time controls, in Deep Blue - Kasparov, 1996, Game 1. Kasparov bounced back with three wins and two draws in the remaining five games, and won the match 4–2.\n\nIn May 1997, an updated version of Deep Blue defeated Kasparov 3½–2½ in a highly publicized six-game match. The match was even after five games but Kasparov lost quickly in Game 6. This was the first time a computer had ever defeated a world champion in match play. A documentary film was made about this famous matchup entitled \"\".\n\nKasparov claimed that several factors weighed against him in this match. In particular, he was denied access to Deep Blue's recent games, in contrast to the computer's team, which could study hundreds of Kasparov's.\n\nAfter the loss Kasparov said that he sometimes saw deep intelligence and creativity in the machine's moves, suggesting that during the second game, human chess players, in contravention of the rules, intervened. IBM denied that it cheated, saying the only human intervention occurred between games. The rules provided for the developers to modify the program between games, an opportunity they said they used to shore up weaknesses in the computer's play revealed during the course of the match. Kasparov requested printouts of the machine's log files but IBM refused, although the company later published the logs on the Internet. Although Kasparov wanted another rematch, IBM declined and ended their Deep Blue program.\n\nKasparov's loss to Deep Blue inspired the creation of the game Arimaa.\n\nIn January 2003, he engaged in a six-game classical time control match with a $1 million prize fund which was billed as the FIDE \"Man vs. Machine\" World Championship, against Deep Junior. The engine evaluated three million positions per second. After one win each and three draws, it was all up to the final game. After reaching a decent position Kasparov offered a draw, which was soon accepted by the Deep Junior team. Asked why he offered the draw, Kasparov said he feared making a blunder. Originally planned as an annual event, the match was not repeated.\n\nDeep Junior was the first machine to beat Kasparov with black and at a standard time control.\n\nIn November 2003, he engaged in a four-game match against the computer program X3D Fritz, using a virtual board, 3D glasses and a speech recognition system. After two draws and one win apiece, the X3D Man–Machine match ended in a draw. Kasparov received $175,000 for the result and took home the golden trophy. Kasparov continued to criticize the blunder in the second game that cost him a crucial point. He felt that he had outplayed the machine overall and played well. \"I only made one mistake but unfortunately that one mistake lost the game.\"\n\n\n\n\n \n", "id": "12810", "title": "Garry Kasparov"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12815", "text": "Flag of Greenland\n\nThe flag of Greenland was designed by Greenland native Thue Christiansen. It features two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and red with a large disk slightly to the hoist side of centre. The top half of the disk is red, the bottom half is white. The entire flag measures 18 by 12 parts; each stripe measures 6 parts; the disk is 8 parts in diameter, horizontally offset by 7 parts from the hoist to the centre of the circle, and vertically centered.\n\nIts local name in the Greenlandic language is \"Erfalasorput\", which means \"our flag\". The term \"Aappalaartoq\" (meaning \"the red\") is also used for both the Greenlandic flag and the flag of Denmark (\"Dannebrog\"). Today, Greenlanders display both the \"Erfalasorput\" and the \"Dannebrog\"—often side-by-side. The flag of Greenland is the only national flag of a Nordic country or territory without a Nordic Cross.\n\nGreenland first entertained the idea of a flag of its own in 1973 when five Greenlanders proposed a green, white and blue flag. The following year, a newspaper solicited eleven design proposals (all but one of which was a Nordic cross) and polled the people to determine the most popular. The flag of Denmark was preferred to the others. Little came of this effort.\n\nIn 1978, Denmark granted home rule to Greenland, making it an equal member of the \"Danish Realm\". The home rule government held an official call for flag proposals, receiving 555 (of which 293 were submitted by Greenlanders).\nThe deciding committee came to no consensus, so more proposals were solicited. Finally the present red-and-white design by Christiansen narrowly won over a green-and-white Nordic cross by a vote of fourteen to eleven. Christiansen's red-and-white flag was officially adopted on 21 June 1985.\n\nTo honour the tenth anniversary of the \"Erfalasorput\", the Greenland Post Office issued commemorative postage stamps and a leaflet by the flag's creator. He described the white stripe as representing the glaciers and ice cap, which cover more than 80% of the island; the red stripe, the ocean; the red semicircle, the sun, with its bottom part sunk in the ocean; and the white semicircle, the icebergs and pack ice. The design is also reminiscent of the setting sun half-submerged below the horizon and reflected on the sea. In 1985, the public was made aware that Greenland's flag had exactly the same motif as the flag of the Danish rowing club, HEI Rosport, which was founded before Greenland's flag was chosen. It is not clear whether this is a case of plagiarism or just a coincidence, but the rowing club has given Greenland permission to use their flag.\n\nThe colours of the \"Erfalasorput\" are the same as those of the \"Dannebrog\", symbolizing Greenland's place in the Danish realm.\n\n\n", "id": "12815", "title": "Flag of Greenland"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12816", "text": "Gustav Radbruch\n\nGustav Radbruch (21 November 1878 – 23 November 1949) was a German legal scholar and politician. He served as Minister of Justice of Germany during the early Weimar period. Radbruch is also regarded as one of the most influential legal philosophers of the 20th century.\n\nBorn in Lübeck, Radbruch studied law in Munich, Leipzig and Berlin. He passed his first bar exam (\"Staatsexamen\") in Berlin in 1901, and the following year he received his doctorate with a dissertation on \"The Theory of adequate causation.\" This was followed in 1903 by his qualification to teach criminal law in Heidelberg. In 1904, he was appointed Professor of criminal and trial law and legal philosophy in Heidelberg. In 1914 he accepted a call to a professorship in Königsberg, and later that year assumed a professorship at Kiel.\nRadbruch was a member of the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD), and held a seat in the Reichstag from 1920 to 1924. In 1921-22 and throughout 1923, he was minister of justice in the cabinets of Joseph Wirth and Gustav Stresemann. During his time in office, a number of important laws were implemented, such as those giving women access to the justice system, and, after the assassination of Walter Rathenau, the law for the protection of the republic.\n\nIn 1926, Radbruch accepted a renewed call to lecture at Heidelberg. After the Nazi seizure of power in 1933, Radbruch was dismissed from his civil service post, as the universities were public entities. During the Nazi period, he devoted himself primarily to cultural-historical work.\n\nImmediately after the end of the Second World War in 1945, he resumed his teaching activities, but died at Heidelberg in 1949 without being able to complete his planned updated edition of his textbook on legal philosophy.\n\nIn September 1945, Radbruch published a short paper \"Fünf Minuten Rechtsphilosophie\" (five minutes of legal philosophy), that was influential in shaping the jurisprudence of values (Wertungsjurisprudenz), prevalent in the aftermath of World War II as a reaction against legal positivism.\n\nRadbruch's legal philosophy derived from Neokantianism, which assumes that a categorical cleavage exists between \"is\" (\"sein\") and \"ought\" (\"sollen\"). According to this view, \"should\" can never be derived from \"Being.\" Indicative of the Heidelberg school of neokantianism to which Radbruch subscribed was that it interpolated the value-related cultural studies between the explanatory sciences (being) and philosophical teachings of values (should).\nIn relation to the law, this triadism shows itself in the subfields of legal sociology, legal philosophy and legal dogma. Legal dogma assumes a place in between. It posits itself in opposition to positive law, as the latter depicts itself in social reality and methodologically in the objective \"should-have\" sense of law, which reveals itself through value-related interpretation.\n\nThe core of Radbruch's legal philosophy consists of his tenets the concept of law and the idea of law. The idea of law is defined through a triad of justice, utility and certainty. Radbruch thereby had the idea of utility or usefuleness spring forth from an analysis of the idea of justice. Upon this notion was based the Radbruch formula, which is still vigorously debated today. The concept of law, for Radbruch, is \"nothing other than the given fact, which has the sense to serve the idea of law.\"\n\nHotly disputed is the question whether Radbruch was a legal positivist before 1933 and executed an about-face in his thinking due to the advent of Nazism, or whether he continued to develop, under the impression of Nazi crimes, the relativistic values-teaching he had already been advocating before 1933.\n\nThe problem of the controversy between the spirit and the letter of the law, in Germany, has been brought back to public attention due to the trials of former East German soldiers who guarded the Berlin Wall—the so-called necessity of following orders. Radbruch's theories are posited against the positivist \"pure legal tenets\" represented by Hans Kelsen and, to some extent, also from Georg Jellinek.\n\nIn sum, Radbruch's formula argues that where statutory law is incompatible with the requirements of justice \"to an intolerable degree\", or where statutory law was obviously designed in a way that deliberately negates \"the equality that is the core of all justice\", statutory law must be disregarded by a judge in favour of the justice principle. Since its first publication in 1946 the principle has been accepted by Germany's Federal Constitutional Court in a variety of cases. Many people partially blame the older German legal tradition of legal positivism for the ease with which Hitler obtained power in an outwardly \"legal\" manner, rather than by means of a coup. Arguably, the shift to a concept of natural law ought to act as a safeguard against dictatorship, an untrammeled State power and the abrogation of civil rights.\n\n", "id": "12816", "title": "Gustav Radbruch"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12821", "text": "Gate\n\nA gate or gateway is a point of entry to a space which is enclosed by walls. Gates may prevent or control the entry or exit of individuals, or they may be merely decorative. Other terms for gate include yett and port. The word derives from the old Norse \"gata\", meaning road or path, and originally referred to the gap in the wall or fence, rather than the barrier which closed it. The moving part or parts of a gateway may be called \"doors\", but used for the whole point of entry door usually refers to the entry to a building, or an internal opening between different rooms.\n\nA gate may have a latch to keep it from swinging and a lock for security. Larger gates can be used for a whole building, such as a castle or fortified town, or the actual doors that block entry through the gatehouse. Today, many gate doors are opened by an automated gate operator.\n\nTypes of gates include:\n\n\n\n", "id": "12821", "title": "Gate"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12822", "text": "Greek fire\n\nGreek fire was an incendiary weapon developed 672 and used by the Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire. The Byzantines typically used it in naval battles to great effect, as it could continue burning while floating on water. It provided a technological advantage and was responsible for many key Byzantine military victories, most notably the salvation of Constantinople from two Arab sieges, thus securing the Empire's survival.\n\nThe impression made by Greek fire on the western European Crusaders was such that the name was applied to any sort of incendiary weapon, including those used by Arabs, the Chinese, and the Mongols. These, however, were different mixtures and not the Byzantine formula, which was a closely guarded state secret. Byzantine use of incendiary mixtures was distinguished by the use of pressurized nozzles or \"siphōn\" to project the liquid onto the enemy.\n\nAlthough usage of the term \"Greek fire\" has been general in English and most other languages since the Crusades, original Byzantine sources called the substance a variety of names, such as \"sea fire\" (Medieval Greek: πῦρ θαλάσσιον \"pŷr thalássion\"), \"Roman fire\" ( \"pŷr rhōmaïkón\"), \"war fire\" ( \"polemikòn pŷr\"), \"liquid fire\" ( \"hygròn pŷr\"), \"sticky fire\" ( \"pŷr kollētikón\") or \"manufactured fire\" ( \"pŷr skeuastón\").\n\nThe composition of Greek fire is unknown. It remains a matter of speculation and debate, with various proposals including combinations of pine resin, naphtha, quicklime, calcium phosphide, sulfur, or niter.\n\nIncendiary and flaming weapons were used in warfare for centuries prior to the invention of Greek fire. They included a number of sulfur-, petroleum-, and bitumen-based mixtures. Incendiary arrows and pots containing combustible substances were used as early as the 9th century BC by the Assyrians and were extensively used in the Greco-Roman world as well.\n\nFurthermore, Thucydides mentions that in the siege of Delium in 424 BC a long tube on wheels was used which blew flames forward using a large bellows. In naval warfare, the Byzantine Emperor Anastasius I (r. 491–518) is recorded by chronicler John Malalas to have been advised by a philosopher from Athens called Proclus to use sulfur to burn the ships of Vitalianus.\n\nGreek fire proper, however, was developed in c. 672 and is ascribed by the chronicler Theophanes to Kallinikos (Latinized Callinicus), an architect from Heliopolis in the former province of Phoenice, by then overrun by the Muslim conquests. The accuracy and exact chronology of this account is open to question: Theophanes reports the use of fire-carrying and \"siphōn\"-equipped ships by the Byzantines a couple of years before the supposed arrival of Kallinikos at Constantinople. If this is not due to chronological confusion of the events of the siege, it may suggest that Kallinikos merely introduced an improved version of an established weapon. The historian James Partington further thinks it likely that Greek fire was not in fact the creation of any single person but \"invented by chemists in Constantinople who had inherited the discoveries of the Alexandrian chemical school\". Indeed, the 11th-century chronicler George Kedrenos records that Kallinikos came from Heliopolis in Egypt, but most scholars reject this as an error. Kedrenos also records the story, considered rather implausible by modern scholars, that Kallinikos' descendants, a family called \"Lampros\", \"brilliant\", kept the secret of the fire's manufacture and continued doing so to Kedrenos' time.\n\nKallinikos' development of Greek fire came at a critical moment in the Byzantine Empire's history: weakened by its long wars with Sassanid Persia, the Byzantines had been unable to effectively resist the onslaught of the Muslim conquests. Within a generation, Syria, Palestine, and Egypt had fallen to the Arabs, who in set out to conquer the imperial capital of Constantinople. Greek fire was used to great effect against the Muslim fleets, helping to repel the Muslims at the first and second Arab sieges of the city. Records of its use in later naval battles against the Saracens are more sporadic, but it did secure a number of victories, especially in the phase of Byzantine expansion in the late 9th and early 10th centuries. Utilisation of the substance was prominent in Byzantine civil wars, chiefly the revolt of the thematic fleets in 727 and the large-scale rebellion led by Thomas the Slav in 821–823. In both cases, the rebel fleets were defeated by the Constantinopolitan Imperial Fleet through the use of Greek fire. The Byzantines also used the weapon to devastating effect against the various Rus' raids on the Bosporus, especially those of 941 and 1043, as well as during the Bulgarian war of 970–971, when the fire-carrying Byzantine ships blockaded the Danube.\n\nThe importance placed on Greek fire during the Empire's struggle against the Arabs would lead to its discovery being ascribed to divine intervention. The Emperor Constantine Porphyrogennetos (r. 945–959), in his book \"De Administrando Imperio\", admonishes his son and heir, Romanos II (r. 959–963), to never reveal the secrets of its composition, as it was \"shown and revealed by an angel to the great and holy first Christian emperor Constantine\" and that the angel bound him \"not to prepare this fire but for Christians, and only in the imperial city\". As a warning, he adds that one official, who was bribed into handing some of it over to the Empire's enemies, was struck down by a \"flame from heaven\" as he was about to enter a church. As the latter incident demonstrates, the Byzantines could not avoid capture of their precious secret weapon: the Arabs captured at least one fireship intact in 827, and the Bulgars captured several \"siphōns\" and much of the substance itself in 812/814. This, however, was apparently not enough to allow their enemies to copy it (see below). The Arabs, for instance, employed a variety of incendiary substances similar to the Byzantine weapon, but they were never able to copy the Byzantine method of deployment by \"siphōn\", and used catapults and grenades instead.\n\nGreek fire continued to be mentioned during the 12th century, and Anna Komnene gives a vivid description of its use in a naval battle against the Pisans in 1099. However, although the use of hastily improvised fireships is mentioned during the 1203 siege of Constantinople by the Fourth Crusade, no report confirms the use of the actual Greek fire. This might be because of the general disarmament of the Empire in the 20 years leading up to the sacking, or because the Byzantines had lost access to the areas where the primary ingredients were to be found, or even perhaps because the secret had been lost over time.\n\nRecords of a 13th-century event in which \"Greek fire\" was used by the Saracens against the Crusaders can be read through the Memoirs of the Lord of Joinville during the Seventh Crusade. One description of the memoir says \"the tail of fire that trailed behind it was as big as a great spear; and it made such a noise as it came, that it sounded like the thunder of heaven. It looked like a dragon flying through the air. Such a bright light did it cast, that one could see all over the camp as though it were day, by reason of the great mass of fire, and the brilliance of the light that it shed.\"\n\nIn the 19th century, it is reported that an Armenian by the name of Kavafian approached the government of the Ottoman Empire with a new type of Greek fire he claimed to have developed. Kavafian refused to reveal its composition when asked by the government, insisting that he be placed in command of its use during naval engagements. Not long after this, he was poisoned by imperial authorities, without their ever having found out his secret.\n\nAs Constantine Porphyrogennetos' warnings show, the ingredients and the processes of manufacture and deployment of Greek fire were carefully guarded military secrets. So strict was the secrecy that the composition of Greek fire was lost forever and remains a source of speculation. Consequently, the \"mystery\" of the formula has long dominated the research into Greek fire. Despite this almost exclusive focus, however, Greek fire is best understood as a complete weapon system of many components, all of which were needed to operate together to render it effective. This comprised not only the formula of its composition, but also the specialized dromon ships that carried it into battle, the device used to prepare the substance by heating and pressurizing it, the \"siphōn\" projecting it; and the special training of the \"siphōnarioi\" who used it. Knowledge of the whole system was highly compartmentalised, with operators and technicians aware of the secrets of only one component, ensuring that no enemy could gain knowledge of it in its entirety. This accounts for the fact that when the Bulgarians took Mesembria and Debeltos in 814, they captured 36 \"siphōns\" and even quantities of the substance itself, but were unable to make any use of them.\n\nThe information available on Greek fire is exclusively indirect, based on references in the Byzantine military manuals and a number of secondary historical sources such as Anna Komnene and Western European chroniclers, which are often inaccurate. In her \"Alexiad\", Anna Komnene provides a description of an incendiary weapon, which was used by the Byzantine garrison of Dyrrhachium in 1108 against the Normans. It is often regarded as an at least partial \"recipe\" for Greek fire:\nThis fire is made by the following arts. From the pine and the certain such evergreen trees inflammable resin is collected. This is rubbed with sulfur and put into tubes of reed, and is blown by men using it with violent and continuous breath. Then in this manner it meets the fire on the tip and catches light and falls like a fiery whirlwind on the faces of the enemies. At the same time, the reports by Western chroniclers of the famed \"ignis graecus\" are largely unreliable, since they apply the name to any and all sorts of incendiary substances.\n\nIn attempting to reconstruct the Greek fire system, the concrete evidence, as it emerges from the contemporary literary references, provides the following characteristics:\n\nThe first and, for a long time, most popular theory regarding the composition of Greek fire held that its chief ingredient was saltpeter, making it an early form of gunpowder. This argument was based on the \"thunder and smoke\" description, as well as on the distance the flame could be projected from the \"siphōn\", which suggested an explosive discharge. From the times of Isaac Vossius, several scholars adhered to this position, most notably the so-called \"French school\" during the 19th century, which included chemist Marcellin Berthelot. This view has been rejected since, as saltpeter does not appear to have been used in warfare in Europe or the Middle East before the 13th century, and is absent from the accounts of the Muslim writers—the foremost chemists of the early medieval world—before the same period. In addition, the nature of the proposed mixture would have been radically different from the \"siphōn\"-projected substance described by Byzantine sources.\n\nA second view, based on the fact that Greek fire was inextinguishable by water (some sources suggest that water intensified the flames) suggested that its destructive power was the result of the explosive reaction between water and quicklime. Although quicklime was certainly known and used by the Byzantines and the Arabs in warfare, the theory is refuted by literary and empirical evidence. A quicklime-based substance would have to come in contact with water to ignite, while Emperor Leo's \"Tactica\" indicate that Greek fire was often poured directly on the decks of enemy ships, although admittedly, decks were kept wet due to lack of sealants. Likewise, Leo describes the use of grenades, which further reinforces the view that contact with water was not necessary for the substance's ignition. Furthermore, C. Zenghelis pointed out that, based on experiments, the actual result of the water-quicklime reaction would be negligible in the open sea. Another similar proposition suggested that Kallinikos had in fact discovered calcium phosphide, which can be made by boiling bones in urine within a sealed vessel. On contact with water, calcium phosphide releases phosphine, which ignites spontaneously. However, extensive experiments with it also failed to reproduce the described intensity of Greek fire.\n\nAlthough the presence of either quicklime or saltpeter in the mixture cannot be entirely excluded, they were consequently not the primary ingredient. Most modern scholars agree that Greek fire was based on petroleum, either crude or refined; comparable to modern napalm. The Byzantines had easy access to crude oil from the naturally occurring wells around the Black Sea (e.g., the wells around Tmutorakan noted by Constantine Porphyrogennetos) or in various locations throughout the Middle East. An alternate name for Greek fire was \"Median fire\" (), and the 6th-century historian Procopius, records that crude oil, called \"naphtha\" (in Greek: \"naphtha\", from Old Persian \"naft\") by the Persians, was known to the Greeks as \"Median oil\" (). This seems to corroborate the use of naphtha as a basic ingredient of Greek fire. Naphtha was also used by the Abbasids in the 9th century, with special troops, the \"naffāṭūn\", who wore thick protective suits and used small copper vessels containing burning oil, which they threw onto the enemy troops. There is also a surviving 9th Century Latin text, preserved at Wolfenbüttel in Germany, which mentions the ingredients of what appears to be Greek fire and the operation of the \"siphōn\"s used to project it. Although the text contains some inaccuracies, it clearly identifies the main component as naphtha. Resins were probably added as a thickener (the \"Praecepta Militaria\" refer to the substance as , \"sticky fire\"), and to increase the duration and intensity of the flame. A modern theoretical concoction included the use of pine tar and animal fat along with other ingredients.\n\nA 12th Century treatise prepared by Mardi bin Ali al-Tarsusi for Saladin records an Arab version of Greek fire, called \"naft\", which also had a petroleum base, with sulfur and various resins added. Any direct relation with the Byzantine formula is unlikely. An Italian recipe from the 16th century has been recorded for recreational use; it includes coal from a willow tree, alcohol, incense, sulfur, wool and camphor as well as two undetermined components (burning salt and \"pegola\"), the concoction was guaranteed to \"burn under water\" and to be \"beautiful\".\n\nThe chief method of deployment of Greek fire, which sets it apart from similar substances, was its projection through a tube (\"siphōn\"), for use aboard ships or in sieges. Portable projectors (\"cheirosiphōnes\") were also invented, reputedly by Emperor Leo VI. The Byzantine military manuals also mention that jars (\"chytrai\" or \"tzykalia\") filled with Greek fire and caltrops wrapped with tow and soaked in the substance were thrown by catapults, while pivoting cranes (\"gerania\") were employed to pour it upon enemy ships. The \"cheirosiphōnes\" especially were prescribed for use at land and in sieges, both against siege machines and against defenders on the walls, by several 10th-century military authors, and their use is depicted in the \"Poliorcetica\" of Hero of Byzantium. The Byzantine dromons usually had a \"siphōn\" installed on their prow under the forecastle, but additional devices could also on occasion be placed elsewhere on the ship. Thus in 941, when the Byzantines were facing the vastly more numerous Rus' fleet, \"siphōn\"s were placed also amidships and even astern.\n\nThe use of tubular projectors (σίφων, \"siphōn\") is amply attested in the contemporary sources. Anna Komnene gives this account of beast-shaped Greek fire projectors being mounted to the bow of warships:\nAs he [the Emperor Alexios I] knew that the Pisans were skilled in sea warfare and dreaded a battle with them, on the prow of each ship he had a head fixed of a lion or other land-animal, made in brass or iron with the mouth open and then gilded over, so that their mere aspect was terrifying. And the fire which was to be directed against the enemy through tubes he made to pass through the mouths of the beasts, so that it seemed as if the lions and the other similar monsters were vomiting the fire.\n\nSome sources provide more information on the composition and function of the whole mechanism. The Wolfenbüttel manuscript in particular provides the following description:\n...having built a furnace right at the front of the ship, they set on it a copper vessel full of these things, having put fire underneath. And one of them, having made a bronze tube similar to that which the rustics call a \"squitiatoria\", \"squirt\", with which boys play, they spray [it] at the enemy.\n\nAnother, possibly first-hand, account of the use of Greek fire comes from the 11th-century \"Yngvars saga víðförla\", in which the Viking Ingvar the Far-Travelled faces ships equipped with Greek fire weapons:\n[They] began blowing with smiths’ bellows at a furnace in which there was fire and there came from it a great din. There stood there also a brass [or bronze] tube and from it flew much fire against one ship, and it burned up in a short time so that all of it became white ashes...\nThe account, albeit embellished, corresponds with many of the characteristics of Greek fire known from other sources, such as a loud roar that accompanied its discharge. These two texts are also the only two sources that explicitly mention that the substance was heated over a furnace before being discharged; although the validity of this information is open to question, modern reconstructions have relied upon them.\nBased on these descriptions and the Byzantine sources, John Haldon and Maurice Byrne designed a hypothetical apparatus as consisting of three main components: a bronze pump, which was used to pressurize the oil; a brazier, used to heat the oil (πρόπυρον, \"propyron\", \"pre-heater\"); and the nozzle, which was covered in bronze and mounted on a swivel (στρεπτόν, \"strepton\"). The brazier, burning a match of linen or flax that produced intense heat and the characteristic thick smoke, was used to heat oil and the other ingredients in an airtight tank above it, a process that also helped to dissolve the resins into a fluid mixture. The substance was pressurized by the heat and the usage of a force pump. After it had reached the proper pressure, a valve connecting the tank with the swivel was opened and the mixture was discharged from its end, being ignited at its mouth by some source of flame. The intense heat of the flame made necessary the presence of heat shields made of iron (βουκόλια, \"boukolia\"), which are attested in the fleet inventories.\n\nThe process of operating Haldon and Byrne's design was fraught with danger, as the mounting pressure could easily make the heated oil tank explode, a flaw which was not recorded as a problem with the historical fire weapon. In the experiments conducted by Haldon in 2002 for the episode \"Fireship\" of the television series \"Machines Times Forgot\", even modern welding techniques failed to secure adequate insulation of the bronze tank under pressure. This led to the relocation of the pressure pump between the tank and the nozzle. The full-scale device built on this basis established the effectiveness of the mechanism's design, even with the simple materials and techniques available to the Byzantines. The experiment used crude oil mixed with wood resins, and achieved a flame temperature of over and an effective range of up to .\n\nThe portable \"cheirosiphōn\" (\"hand-\"siphōn\"\"), the earliest analogue to a modern flamethrower, is extensively attested in the military documents of the 10th century, and recommended for use in both sea and land. They first appear in the \"Tactica\" of emperor Leo VI the Wise, who claims to have invented them. Subsequent authors continued to refer to the \"cheirosiphōnes\", especially for use against siege towers, although Nikephoros II Phokas also advises their use in field armies, with the aim of disrupting the enemy formation. Although both Leo VI and Nikephoros Phokas claim that the substance used in the \"cheirosiphōnes\" was the same as in the static devices used on ships, Haldon and Byrne consider that the former were manifestly different from their larger cousins, and theorize that the device was fundamentally different, \"a simple syringe [that] squirted both liquid fire (presumably unignited) and noxious juices to repel enemy troops.\" However the illustrations of Hero's \"Poliorcetica\" show the \"cheirosiphōn\" also throwing the ignited substance.\n\nIn its earliest form, Greek fire was hurled onto enemy forces by firing a burning cloth-wrapped ball, perhaps containing a flask, using a form of light catapult, most probably a seaborne variant of the Roman light catapult or onager. These were capable of hurling light loads—around —a distance of .\n\nAlthough the destructiveness of Greek fire is indisputable, it did not make the Byzantine navy invincible. It was not, in the words of naval historian John Pryor, a \"ship-killer\" comparable to the naval ram, which, by then, had fallen out of use. While Greek fire remained a potent weapon, its limitations were significant when compared to more traditional forms of artillery: in its \"siphōn\"-deployed version, it had a limited range, and it could be used safely only in a calm sea and with favourable wind conditions.\n\nThe Muslim navies eventually adapted themselves to it by staying out of its effective range and devising methods of protection such as felt or hides soaked in vinegar.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "12822", "title": "Greek fire"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12823", "text": "Garbage in, garbage out\n\nGarbage in, garbage out (GIGO) in the field of computer science or information and communications technology refers to the fact that computers, since they operate by logical processes, will unquestioningly process unintended, even nonsensical, input data (\"garbage in\") and produce undesired, often nonsensical, output (\"garbage out\"). The principle applies to other fields as well.\n\nIt was popular in the early days of computing, but applies even more today, when powerful computers can produce large amounts of erroneous information in a short time. The first use of the term has been dated to a November 10, 1957, syndicated newspaper article about US Army mathematicians and their work with early computers, in which an Army Specialist named William D. Mellin explained that computers cannot think for themselves, and that \"sloppily programmed\" inputs inevitably lead to incorrect outputs. The underlying principle was noted by the inventor of the first programmable computing device design:\n\nMore recently, the Marine Accident Investigation Branch comes to a similar conclusion: \n\nThe term may have been derived from last-in, first-out (LIFO) or first-in, first-out (FIFO).\n\n\n\nIt is not possible to carry out an accurate statistical analysis of inaccurate data.\n\n", "id": "12823", "title": "Garbage in, garbage out"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12828", "text": "GATT (disambiguation)\n\nGATT may refer to:\n\nGatt may refer to:\n", "id": "12828", "title": "GATT (disambiguation)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12830", "text": "Gipsy\n\nGipsy or GIPSY may refer to:\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "12830", "title": "Gipsy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12831", "text": "General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade\n\nGeneral Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) was a multilateral agreement regulating international trade. According to its preamble, its purpose was the \"substantial reduction of tariffs and other trade barriers and the elimination of preferences, on a reciprocal and mutually advantageous basis.\" It was negotiated during the United Nations Conference on Trade and Employment and was the outcome of the failure of negotiating governments to create the International Trade Organization (ITO). GATT was signed by 23 nations in Geneva on October 30, 1947 and took effect on January 1, 1948. It lasted until the signature by 123 nations in Marrakesh on April 14, 1994 of the Uruguay Round Agreements, which established the World Trade Organization (WTO) on January 1, 1995.\n\nThe original GATT text (GATT 1947) is still in effect under the WTO framework, subject to the modifications of GATT 1994.\n\nGATT held a total of nine rounds,\nThe second round took place in 1949 in Annecy, France. 13 countries took part in the round. The main focus of the talks was more tariff reductions, around 5000 in total.\n\nThe third round occurred in Torquay, England in 1951. Thirty-eight countries took part in the round. 8,700 tariff concessions were made totaling the remaining amount of tariffs to ¾ of the tariffs which were in effect in 1948. The contemporaneous rejection by the U.S. of the Havana Charter signified the establishment of the GATT as a governing world body.\n\nThe fourth round returned to Geneva in 1955 and lasted until May 1956. Twenty-six countries took part in the round. $2.5 billion in tariffs were eliminated or reduced.\n\nThe fifth round occurred once more in Geneva and lasted from 1960-1962. The talks were named after U.S. Treasury Secretary and former Under Secretary of State, Douglas Dillon, who first proposed the talks. Twenty-six countries took part in the round. Along with reducing over $4.9 billion in tariffs, it also yielded discussion relating to the creation of the European Economic Community (EEC).\n\nThe sixth round of GATT multilateral trade negotiations, held from 1963 to 1967. It was named after U.S. President John F. Kennedy in recognition of his support for the reformulation of the United States trade agenda, which resulted in the Trade Expansion Act of 1962. This Act gave the President the widest-ever negotiating authority.\n\nAs the Dillon Round went through the laborious process of item-by-item tariff negotiations, it became clear, long before the Round ended, that a more comprehensive approach was needed to deal with the emerging challenges resulting from the formation of the European Economic Community (EEC) and EFTA, as well as Europe's re-emergence as a significant international trader more generally.\n\nJapan's high economic growth rate portended the major role it would play later as an exporter, but the focal point of the Kennedy Round always was the United States-EEC relationship. Indeed, there was an influential American view that saw what became the Kennedy Round as the start of a transatlantic partnership that might ultimately lead to a transatlantic economic community.\n\nTo an extent, this view was shared in Europe, but the process of European unification created its own stresses under which the Kennedy Round at times became a secondary focus for the EEC. An example of this was the French veto in January 1963, before the round had even started, on membership by the United Kingdom.\n\nAnother was the internal crisis of 1965, which ended in the Luxembourg Compromise. Preparations for the new round were immediately overshadowed by the Chicken War, an early sign of the impact variable levies under the Common Agricultural Policy would eventually have. Some participants in the Round had been concerned that the convening of UNCTAD, scheduled for 1964, would result in further complications, but its impact on the actual negotiations was minimal.\n\nIn May 1963 Ministers reached agreement on three negotiating objectives for the round:\n\n(a) Measures for the expansion of trade of developing countries as a means of furthering their economic development,\n\n(b) Reduction or elimination of tariffs and other barriers to trade, and\n\n(c) Measures for access to markets for agricultural and other primary products.\n\nThe working hypothesis for the tariff negotiations was a linear tariff cut of 50% with the smallest number of exceptions. A drawn-out argument developed about the trade effects a uniform linear cut would have on the dispersed rates (low and high tariffs quite far apart) of the United States as compared to the much more concentrated rates of the EEC which also tended to be in the lower held of United States tariff rates.\n\nThe EEC accordingly argued for an evening-out or harmonization of peaks and troughs through its cerement, double cart and thirty: ten proposals. Once negotiations had been joined, the lofty working hypothesis was soon undermined. The special-structure countries (Australia, Canada, New Zealand and South Africa), so called because their exports were dominated by raw materials and other primary commodities, negotiated their tariff reductions entirely through the item-by-item method.\n\nIn the end, the result was an average 35% reduction in tariffs, except for textiles, chemicals, steel and other sensitive products; plus a 15% to 18% reduction in tariffs for agricultural and food products. In addition, the negotiations on chemicals led to a provisional agreement on the abolition of the American Selling Price (ASP). This was a method of valuing some chemicals used by the noted States for the imposition of import duties which gave domestic manufacturers a much higher level of protection than the tariff schedule indicated.\n\nHowever, this part of the outcome was disallowed by Congress, and the American Selling Price was not abolished until Congress adopted the results of the Tokyo Round. The results on agriculture overall were poor. The most notable achievement was agreement on a Memorandum of Agreement on Basic Elements for the Negotiation of a World Grants Arrangement, which eventually was rolled into a new International Grains Arrangement.\n\nThe EEC claimed that for it the main result of the negotiations on agriculture was that they \"greatly helped to define its own common policy\". The developing countries, who played a minor role throughout the negotiations in this Round, benefited nonetheless from substantial tariff cuts particularly in non-agricultural items of interest to them.\n\nTheir main achievement at the time, however, was seen to be the adoption of Part IV of the GATT, which absolved them from according reciprocity to developed countries in trade negotiations. In the view of many developing countries, this was a direct result of the call at UNCTAD I for a better trade deal for them.\n\nThere has been argument ever since whether this symbolic gesture was a victory for them, or whether it ensured their exclusion in the future from meaningful participation in the multilateral trading system. On the other hand, there was no doubt that the extension of the Long-Term Arrangement Regarding International Trade in Cotton Textiles, which later became the Multi-Fiber Arrangement, for three years until 1970 led to the longer-term impairment of export opportunities for developing countries.\n\nAnother outcome of the Kennedy Round was the adoption of an Anti-dumping Code, which gave more precise guidance on the implementation of Article VI of the GATT. In particular, it sought to ensure speedy and fair investigations, and it imposed limits on the retrospective application of anti-dumping measures.\n\nKennedy Round took place from 1962-1967. $40 billion in tariffs were eliminated or reduced.\n\nReduced tariffs and established new regulations aimed at controlling the proliferation of non-tariff barriers and voluntary export restrictions. 102 countries took part in the round. Concessions were made on $19 billion worth.\n\nThe Uruguay Round began in 1986. It was the most ambitious round to date, hoping to expand the competence of the GATT to important new areas such as services, capital, intellectual property, textiles, and agriculture. 123 countries took part in the round. The Uruguay Round was also the first set of multilateral trade negotiations in which developing countries had played an active role.\n\nAgriculture was essentially exempted from previous agreements as it was given special status in the areas of import quotas and export subsidies, with only mild caveats. However, by the time of the Uruguay round, many countries considered the exception of agriculture to be sufficiently glaring that they refused to sign a new deal without some movement on agricultural products. These fourteen countries came to be known as the \"Cairns Group\", and included mostly small and medium-sized agricultural exporters such as Australia, Brazil, Canada, Indonesia, and New Zealand.\n\nThe Agreement on Agriculture of the Uruguay Round continues to be the most substantial trade liberalization agreement in agricultural products in the history of trade negotiations. The goals of the agreement were to improve market access for agricultural products, reduce domestic support of agriculture in the form of price-distorting subsidies and quotas, eliminate over time export subsidies on agricultural products and to harmonize to the extent possible sanitary and phytosanitary measures between member countries.\n\nIn 1993, the GATT was updated (\"GATT 1994\") to include new obligations upon its signatories. One of the most significant changes was the creation of the World Trade Organization (WTO). The 75 existing GATT members and the European Communities became the founding members of the WTO on 1 January 1995. The other 52 GATT members rejoined the WTO in the following two years (the last being Congo in 1997). Since the founding of the WTO, 21 new non-GATT members have joined and 29 are currently negotiating membership. There are a total of 164 member countries in the WTO, with Laos and Tajikistan being new members as of 2013.\n\nOf the original GATT members, Syria and the SFR Yugoslavia have not rejoined the WTO. Since FR Yugoslavia, (renamed as Serbia and Montenegro and with membership negotiations later split in two), is not recognised as a direct SFRY successor state; therefore, its application is considered a new (non-GATT) one. The General Council of WTO, on 4 May 2010, agreed to establish a working party to examine the request of Syria for WTO membership. The contracting parties who founded the WTO ended official agreement of the \"GATT 1947\" terms on 31 December 1995. Montenegro became a member in 2012, while Serbia is in the decision stage of the negotiations and is expected to become one of the newest members of the WTO in 2014 or in near future.\n\nWhilst GATT was a set of rules agreed upon by nations, the WTO is an institutional body. The WTO expanded its scope from traded goods to include trade within the service sector and intellectual property rights. Although it was designed to serve multilateral agreements, during several rounds of GATT negotiations (particularly the Tokyo Round) plurilateral agreements created selective trading and caused fragmentation among members. WTO arrangements are generally a multilateral agreement settlement mechanism of GATT.\n\nThe average tariff levels for the major GATT participants were about 22 percent in 1947. As a result of the first negotiating rounds, tariffs were reduced in the GATT core of the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, and Australia, relative to other contracting parties and non-GATT participants. By the Kennedy round (1962-67), the average tariff levels of GATT participants were about 15%. After the Uruguay Round, tariffs were under 5%.\n\nIn addition to facilitating applied tariff reductions, the early GATT's contribution to trade liberalization \"include binding the negotiated tariff reductions for an extended period (made more permanent in 1955), establishing the generality of nondiscrimination through most-favored nation (MFN) treatment and national treatment, ensuring increased transparency of trade policy measures, and providing a forum for future negotiations and for the peaceful resolution of bilateral disputes. All of these elements contributed to the rationalization of trade policy and the reduction of trade barriers and policy uncertainty.\"\n\n\n\n", "id": "12831", "title": "General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12832", "text": "G protein–coupled receptor\n\nG protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs) which are also known as seven-transmembrane domain receptors, 7TM receptors, heptahelical receptors, serpentine receptor, and G protein–linked receptors (GPLR), constitute a large protein family of receptors, that detect molecules outside the cell and activate internal signal transduction pathways and, ultimately, cellular responses. Coupling with G proteins, they are called seven-transmembrane receptors because they pass through the cell membrane seven times.\n\nG protein–coupled receptors are found only in eukaryotes, including yeast, choanoflagellates, and animals. The ligands that bind and activate these receptors include light-sensitive compounds, odors, pheromones, hormones, and neurotransmitters, and vary in size from small molecules to peptides to large proteins. G protein–coupled receptors are involved in many diseases, and are also the target of approximately 40% of all modern medicinal drugs.\n\nThere are two principal signal transduction pathways involving the G protein–coupled receptors: \nWhen a ligand binds to the GPCR it causes a conformational change in the GPCR, which allows it to act as a guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF). The GPCR can then activate an associated G protein by exchanging its bound GDP for a GTP. The G protein's α subunit, together with the bound GTP, can then dissociate from the β and γ subunits to further affect intracellular signaling proteins or target functional proteins directly depending on the α subunit type (G, G, G, G).\n\nThe 2012 Nobel Prize in Chemistry was awarded to Brian Kobilka and Robert Lefkowitz for their work that was \"crucial for understanding how G protein–coupled receptors function\". There have been at least seven other Nobel Prizes awarded for some aspect of G protein–mediated signaling. As of 2012, two of the top ten global best-selling drugs (Advair Diskus and Abilify) act by targeting G protein–coupled receptors.\n\nThe exact size of the GPCR superfamily is unknown, but nearly 800 different human genes (or ~ 4% of the entire protein-coding genome) have been predicted to code for them from genome sequence analysis. Although numerous classification schemes have been proposed, the superfamily was classically divided into three main classes (A, B and C) with no detectable shared sequence homology between classes.\n\nThe largest class by far is class A, which accounts for nearly 85% of the GPCR genes. Of class A GPCRs, over half of these are predicted to encode olfactory receptors, while the remaining receptors are liganded by known endogenous compounds or are classified as orphan receptors. Despite the lack of sequence homology between classes, all GPCRs have a common structure and mechanism of signal transduction. The very large rhodopsin A group has been further subdivided into 19 subgroups (A1-A19).\n\nMore recently, an alternative classification system called GRAFS (Glutamate, Rhodopsin, \"Adhesion\", Frizzled/Taste2, Secretin) has been proposed. By this system, GPCRs can be grouped into 6 classes based on sequence homology and functional similarity:\n\nAn early study based on available DNA sequence suggested that the human genome encodes roughly 750 G protein–coupled receptors, about 350 of which detect hormones, growth factors, and other endogenous ligands. Approximately 150 of the GPCRs found in the human genome have unknown functions.\n\nSome web-servers and bioinformatics prediction methods have been used for predicting the classification of GPCRs according to their amino acid sequence alone, by means of the pseudo amino acid composition approach.\n\nGPCRs are involved in a wide variety of physiological processes. Some examples of their physiological roles include:\n\n\nGPCRs are integral membrane proteins that possess seven membrane-spanning domains or transmembrane helices. The extracellular parts of the receptor can be glycosylated. These extracellular loops also contain two highly conserved cysteine residues that form disulfide bonds to stabilize the receptor structure. Some seven-transmembrane helix proteins (channelrhodopsin) that resemble GPCRs may contain ion channels, within their protein.\n\nSimilar to GPCRs, the adiponectin receptors 1 and 2 (ADIPOR1 and ADIPOR2) also possess 7 transmembrane domains. However, ADIPOR1 and ADIPOR2 are orientated oppositely to GPCRs in the membrane (i.e., extracellular N-terminus, cytoplasmic C-terminus) and do not associate with G proteins.\n\nEarly structural models for GPCRs were based on their weak analogy to bacteriorhodopsin, for which a structure had been determined by both electron diffraction (, ) and X ray-based crystallography (). In 2000, the first crystal structure of a mammalian GPCR, that of bovine rhodopsin (), was solved. While the main feature, the seven-transmembrane helices, is conserved, the relative orientation of the helices differ significantly from that of bacteriorhodopsin. In 2007, the first structure of a human GPCR was solved (, ). This was followed immediately by a higher resolution structure of the same receptor (). This human β-adrenergic receptor GPCR structure proved highly similar to the bovine rhodopsin in terms of the relative orientation of the seven-transmembrane helices. However, the conformation of the second extracellular loop is entirely different between the two structures. Since this loop constitutes the \"lid\" that covers the top of the ligand binding site, this conformational difference highlights the difficulties in constructing homology models of other GPCRs based only on the rhodopsin structure.\n\nThe structures of activated and/or agonist-bound GPCRs have also been determined. These structures indicate how ligand binding at the extracellular side of a receptor leads to conformational changes in the cytoplasmic side of the receptor. The biggest change is an outward movement of the cytoplasmic part of the 5th and 6th transmembrane helix (TM5 and TM6). The structure of activated beta-2 adrenergic receptor in complex with G confirmed that the Gα binds to a cavity created by this movement.\n\nA structure database, GPCR-HGmod, was recently constructed which contains 3D structural models of all human G-protein coupled receptors, built by the GPCR-I-TASSER pipeline through homology modeling and ab initio structure prediction.\n\nIn terms of structure, GPCRs are characterized by an extracellular N-terminus, followed by seven transmembrane (7-TM) α-helices (TM-1 to TM-7) connected by three intracellular (IL-1 to IL-3) and three extracellular loops (EL-1 to EL-3), and finally an intracellular C-terminus. The GPCR arranges itself into a tertiary structure resembling a barrel, with the seven transmembrane helices forming a cavity within the plasma membrane that serves a ligand-binding domain that is often covered by EL-2. Ligands may also bind elsewhere, however, as is the case for bulkier ligands (e.g., proteins or large peptides), which instead interact with the extracellular loops, or, as illustrated by the class C metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs), the N-terminal tail. The class C GPCRs are distinguished by their large N-terminal tail, which also contains a ligand-binding domain. Upon glutamate-binding to an mGluR, the N-terminal tail undergoes a conformational change that leads to its interaction with the residues of the extracellular loops and TM domains. The eventual effect of all three types of agonist-induced activation is a change in the relative orientations of the TM helices (likened to a twisting motion) leading to a wider intracellular surface and \"revelation\" of residues of the intracellular helices and TM domains crucial to signal transduction function (i.e., G-protein coupling). Inverse agonists and antagonists may also bind to a number of different sites, but the eventual effect must be prevention of this TM helix reorientation.\n\nThe structure of the N- and C-terminal tails of GPCRs may also serve important functions beyond ligand-binding. For example, The C-terminus of M muscarinic receptors is sufficient, and the six-amino-acid polybasic (KKKRRK) domain in the C-terminus is necessary for its preassembly with G proteins. In particular, the C-terminus often contains serine (Ser) or threonine (Thr) residues that, when phosphorylated, increase the affinity of the intracellular surface for the binding of scaffolding proteins called β-arrestins (β-arr). Once bound, β-arrestins both sterically prevent G-protein coupling and may recruit other proteins, leading to the creation of signaling complexes involved in extracellular-signal regulated kinase (ERK) pathway activation or receptor endocytosis (internalization). As the phosphorylation of these Ser and Thr residues often occurs as a result of GPCR activation, the β-arr-mediated G-protein-decoupling and internalization of GPCRs are important mechanisms of desensitization. In addition, internalized \"mega-complexes\" consisting of a single GPCR, β-arr, and heterotrimeric G protein exist and may account for protein signaling from endosomes.\n\nA final common structural theme among GPCRs is palmitoylation of one or more sites of the C-terminal tail or the intracellular loops. Palmitoylation is the covalent modification of cysteine (Cys) residues via addition of hydrophobic acyl groups, and has the effect of targeting the receptor to cholesterol- and sphingolipid-rich microdomains of the plasma membrane called lipid rafts. As many of the downstream transducer and effector molecules of GPCRs (including those involved in negative feedback pathways) are also targeted to lipid rafts, this has the effect of facilitating rapid receptor signaling.\n\nGPCRs respond to extracellular signals mediated by a huge diversity of agonists, ranging from proteins to biogenic amines to protons, but all transduce this signal via a mechanism of G-protein coupling. This is made possible by a guanine-nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) domain primarily formed by a combination of IL-2 and IL-3 along with adjacent residues of the associated TM helices.\n\nThe G protein–coupled receptor is activated by an external signal in the form of a ligand or other signal mediator. This creates a conformational change in the receptor, causing activation of a G protein. Further effect depends on the type of G protein. G proteins are subsequently inactivated by GTPase activating proteins, known as RGS proteins.\n\nGPCRs include:\nreceptors for sensory signal mediators (e.g., light and olfactory stimulatory molecules); \nadenosine, bombesin, bradykinin, endothelin, γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), melanocortins, neuropeptide Y, opioid peptides, opsins, somatostatin, GH, tachykinins, members of the vasoactive intestinal peptide family, and vasopressin; \nbiogenic amines (e.g., dopamine, epinephrine, norepinephrine, histamine, glutamate (metabotropic effect), glucagon, acetylcholine (muscarinic effect), and serotonin); \nchemokines; \nlipid mediators of inflammation (e.g., prostaglandins, prostanoids, platelet-activating factor, and leukotrienes);\nand peptide hormones (e.g., calcitonin, C5a anaphylatoxin, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), neurokinin, thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), cannabinoids, and oxytocin). \nGPCRs that act as receptors for stimuli that have not yet been identified are known as orphan receptors.\n\nHowever, in other types of receptors that have been studied, wherein ligands bind externally to the membrane, the ligands of GPCRs typically bind within the transmembrane domain. However, protease-activated receptors are activated by cleavage of part of their extracellular domain.\n\nThe transduction of the signal through the membrane by the receptor is not completely understood. It is known that in the inactive state, the GPCR is bound to a heterotrimeric G protein complex. Binding of an agonist to the GPCR results in a conformational change in the receptor that is transmitted to the bound G subunit of the heterotrimeric G protein via . The activated G subunit exchanges GTP in place of GDP which in turn triggers the dissociation of G subunit from the G dimer and from the receptor. The dissociated G and G subunits interact with other intracellular proteins to continue the signal transduction cascade while the freed GPCR is able to rebind to another heterotrimeric G protein to form a new complex that is ready to initiate another round of signal transduction.\n\nIt is believed that a receptor molecule exists in a conformational equilibrium between active and inactive biophysical states. The binding of ligands to the receptor may shift the equilibrium toward the active receptor states. Three types of ligands exist: Agonists are ligands that shift the equilibrium in favour of active states; inverse agonists are ligands that shift the equilibrium in favour of inactive states; and neutral antagonists are ligands that do not affect the equilibrium. It is not yet known how exactly the active and inactive states differ from each other.\n\nWhen the receptor is inactive, the GEF domain may be bound to an also inactive α-subunit of a heterotrimeric G-protein. These \"G-proteins\" are a trimer of α, β, and γ subunits (known as Gα, Gβ, and Gγ, respectively) that is rendered inactive when reversibly bound to Guanosine diphosphate (GDP) (or, alternatively, no guanine nucleotide) but active when bound to Guanosine triphosphate (GTP). Upon receptor activation, the GEF domain, in turn, allosterically activates the G-protein by facilitating the exchange of a molecule of GDP for GTP at the G-protein's α-subunit. The cell maintains a 10:1 ratio of cytosolic GTP:GDP so exchange for GTP is ensured. At this point, the subunits of the G-protein dissociate from the receptor, as well as each other, to yield a Gα-GTP monomer and a tightly interacting Gβγ dimer, which are now free to modulate the activity of other intracellular proteins. The extent to which they may diffuse, however, is limited due to the palmitoylation of Gα and the presence of an isoprenoid moiety that has been covalently added to the C-termini of Gγ.\n\nBecause Gα also has slow GTP→GDP hydrolysis capability, the inactive form of the α-subunit (Gα-GDP) is eventually regenerated, thus allowing reassociation with a Gβγ dimer to form the \"resting\" G-protein, which can again bind to a GPCR and await activation. The rate of GTP hydrolysis is often accelerated due to the actions of another family of allosteric modulating proteins called Regulators of G-protein Signaling, or RGS proteins, which are a type of GTPase-Activating Protein, or GAP. In fact, many of the primary effector proteins (e.g., adenylate cyclases) that become activated/inactivated upon interaction with Gα-GTP also have GAP activity. Thus, even at this early stage in the process, GPCR-initiated signaling has the capacity for self-termination.\n\nGPCRs downstream signals have been shown to possibly interact with integrin signals, such as FAK. Integrin signaling will phosphorylate FAK, which can then decrease GPCR Gαs activity.\n\nIf a receptor in an active state encounters a G protein, it may activate it. Some evidence suggests that receptors and G proteins are actually pre-coupled. For example, binding of G proteins to receptors affects the receptor's affinity for ligands. Activated G proteins are bound to GTP.\n\nFurther signal transduction depends on the type of G protein. The enzyme adenylate cyclase is an example of a cellular protein that can be regulated by a G protein, in this case the G protein G. Adenylate cyclase activity is activated when it binds to a subunit of the activated G protein. Activation of adenylate cyclase ends when the G protein returns to the GDP-bound state.\n\nAdenylate cyclases (of which 9 membrane-bound and one cytosolic forms are known in humans) may also be activated or inhibited in other ways (e.g., Ca2+/Calmodulin binding), which can modify the activity of these enzymes in an additive or synergistic fashion along with the G proteins.\n\nThe signaling pathways activated through a GPCR are limited by the primary sequence and tertiary structure of the GPCR itself but ultimately determined by the particular conformation stabilized by a particular ligand, as well as the availability of transducer molecules. Currently, GPCRs are considered to utilize two primary types of transducers: G-proteins and β-arrestins. Because β-arr’s have high affinity only to the phosphorylated form of most GPCRs (see above or below), the majority of signaling is ultimately dependent upon G-protein activation. However, the possibility for interaction does allow for G-protein-independent signaling to occur.\n\nThere are three main G-protein-mediated signaling pathways, mediated by four sub-classes of G-proteins distinguished from each other by sequence homology (G, G, G, and G). Each sub-class of G-protein consists of multiple proteins, each the product of multiple genes and/or splice variations that may imbue them with differences ranging from subtle to distinct with regard to signaling properties, but in general they appear reasonably grouped into four classes. Because the signal transducing properties of the various possible βγ combinations do not appear to radically differ from one another, these classes are defined according to the isoform of their α-subunit.\n\nWhile most GPCRs are capable of activating more than one Gα-subtype, they also show a preference for one subtype over another. When the subtype activated depends on the ligand that is bound to the GPCR, this is called functional selectivity (also known as agonist-directed trafficking, or conformation-specific agonism). However, the binding of any single particular agonist may also initiate activation of multiple different G-proteins, as it may be capable of stabilizing more than one conformation of the GPCR’s GEF domain, even over the course of a single interaction. In addition, a conformation that preferably activates one isoform of Gα may activate another if the preferred is less available. Furthermore, feedback pathways may result in receptor modifications (e.g., phosphorylation) that alter the G-protein preference. Regardless of these various nuances, the GPCR’s preferred coupling partner is usually defined according to the G-protein most obviously activated by the endogenous ligand under most physiological and/or experimental conditions.\n\n\nThe above descriptions ignore the effects of Gβγ–signalling, which can also be important, in particular in the case of activated G-coupled GPCRs. The primary effectors of Gβγ are various ion channels, such as G-protein-regulated inwardly rectifying K channels (GIRKs), P/Q- and N-type voltage-gated Ca channels, as well as some isoforms of AC and PLC, along with some phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) isoforms.\n\nAlthough they are classically thought of working only together, GPCRs may signal through G-protein-independent mechanisms, and heterotrimeric G-proteins may play functional roles independent of GPCRs. GPCRs may signal independently through many proteins already mentioned for their roles in G-protein-dependent signaling such as β-arrs, GRKs, and Srcs. In addition, further scaffolding proteins involved in subcellular localization of GPCRs (e.g., PDZ-domain-containing proteins) may also act as signal transducers. Most often the effector is a member of the MAPK family.\n\nIn the late 1990s, evidence began accumulating to suggest that some GPCRs are able to signal without G proteins. The ERK2 mitogen-activated protein kinase, a key signal transduction mediator downstream of receptor activation in many pathways, has been shown to be activated in response to cAMP-mediated receptor activation in the slime mold \"D. discoideum\" despite the absence of the associated G protein α- and β-subunits.\n\nIn mammalian cells, the much-studied β-adrenoceptor has been demonstrated to activate the ERK2 pathway after arrestin-mediated uncoupling of G-protein-mediated signaling. Therefore, it seems likely that some mechanisms previously believed related purely to receptor desensitisation are actually examples of receptors switching their signaling pathway, rather than simply being switched off.\n\nIn kidney cells, the bradykinin receptor B2 has been shown to interact directly with a protein tyrosine phosphatase. The presence of a tyrosine-phosphorylated ITIM (immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motif) sequence in the B2 receptor is necessary to mediate this interaction and subsequently the antiproliferative effect of bradykinin.\n\nAlthough it is a relatively immature area of research, it appears that heterotrimeric G-proteins may also take part in non-GPCR signaling. There is evidence for roles as signal transducers in nearly all other types of receptor-mediated signaling, including integrins, receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), cytokine receptors (JAK/STATs), as well as modulation of various other \"accessory\" proteins such as GEFs, Guanine-nucleotide Dissociation Inhibitors (GDIs) and protein phosphatases. There may even be specific proteins of these classes whose primary function is as part of GPCR-independent pathways, termed Activators of G-protein Signalling (AGS). Both the ubiquity of these interactions and the importance of Gα vs. Gβγ subunits to these processes are still unclear.\n\nThere are two principal signal transduction pathways involving the G protein-linked receptors: the cAMP signal pathway and the phosphatidylinositol signal pathway.\n\nThe cAMP signal transduction contains 5 main characters: stimulative hormone receptor (Rs) or inhibitory hormone receptor (Ri); stimulative regulative G-protein (Gs) or inhibitory regulative G-protein (Gi); adenylyl cyclase; protein kinase A (PKA); and cAMP phosphodiesterase.\n\nStimulative hormone receptor (Rs) is a receptor that can bind with stimulative signal molecules, while inhibitory hormone receptor (Ri) is a receptor that can bind with inhibitory signal molecules.\n\nStimulative regulative G-protein is a G-protein linked to stimulative hormone receptor (Rs), and its α subunit upon activation could stimulate the activity of an enzyme or other intracellular metabolism. On the contrary, inhibitory regulative G-protein is linked to an inhibitory hormone receptor, and its α subunit upon activation could inhibit the activity of an enzyme or other intracellular metabolism.\n\nAdenylyl cyclase is a 12-transmembrane glycoprotein that catalyzes ATP to form cAMP with the help of cofactor Mg or Mn. The cAMP produced is a second messenger in cellular metabolism and is an allosteric activator of protein kinase A.\n\nProtein kinase A is an important enzyme in cell metabolism due to its ability to regulate cell metabolism by phosphorylating specific committed enzymes in the metabolic pathway. It can also regulate specific gene expression, cellular secretion, and membrane permeability. The protein enzyme contains two catalytic subunits and two regulatory subunits. When there is no cAMP，the complex is inactive. When cAMP binds to the regulatory subunits, their conformation is altered, causing the dissociation of the regulatory subunits, which activates protein kinase A and allows further biological effects.\n\nThese signals then can be terminated by cAMP phosphodiesterase, which is an enzyme that degrades cAMP to 5'-AMP and inactivates protein kinase A.\n\nIn the phosphatidylinositol signal pathway, the extracellular signal molecule binds with the G-protein receptor (G) on the cell surface and activates phospholipase C, which is located on the plasma membrane. The lipase hydrolyzes phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) into two second messengers: inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG). IP3 binds with the IP3 receptor in the membrane of the smooth endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria to open Ca channels. DAG helps activate protein kinase C (PKC), which phosphorylates many other proteins, changing their catalytic activities, leading to cellular responses.\n\nThe effects of Ca are also remarkable: it cooperates with DAG in activating PKC and can activate the CaM kinase pathway, in which calcium-modulated protein calmodulin (CaM) binds Ca, undergoes a change in conformation, and activates CaM kinase II, which has unique ability to increase its binding affinity to CaM by autophosphorylation, making CaM unavailable for the activation of other enzymes. The kinase then phosphorylates target enzymes, regulating their activities. The two signal pathways are connected together by Ca-CaM, which is also a regulatory subunit of adenylyl cyclase and phosphodiesterase in the cAMP signal pathway.\n\nGPCRs become desensitized when exposed to their ligand for a prolonged period of time. There are two recognized forms of desensitization: 1) homologous desensitization, in which the activated GPCR is downregulated; and 2) heterologous desensitization, wherein the activated GPCR causes downregulation of a different GPCR. The key reaction of this downregulation is the phosphorylation of the intracellular (or cytoplasmic) receptor domain by protein kinases.\n\nCyclic AMP-dependent protein kinases (protein kinase A) are activated by the signal chain coming from the G protein (that was activated by the receptor) via adenylate cyclase and cyclic AMP (cAMP). In a \"feedback mechanism\", these activated kinases phosphorylate the receptor. The longer the receptor remains active the more kinases are activated and the more receptors are phosphorylated. In β-adrenoceptors, this phosphorylation results in the switching of the coupling from the G class of G-protein to the G class. cAMP-dependent PKA mediated phosphorylation can cause heterologous desensitisation in receptors other than those activated.\n\nThe G protein-coupled receptor kinases (GRKs) are protein kinases that phosphorylate only active GPCRs. G-protein-coupled receptor kinases (GRKs) are key modulators of G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling. They constitute a family of seven mammalian serine-threonine protein kinases that phosphorylate agonist-bound receptor. GRKs-mediated receptor phosphorylation rapidly initiates profound impairment of receptor signaling and desensitization. Activity of GRKs and subcellular targeting is tightly regulated by interaction with receptor domains, G protein subunits, lipids, anchoring proteins and calcium-sensitive proteins.\n\nPhosphorylation of the receptor can have two consequences:\n\n\nAs mentioned above, G-proteins may terminate their own activation due to their intrinsic GTP→GDP hydrolysis capability. However, this reaction proceeds at a slow rate (≈.02 times/sec) and, thus, it would take around 50 seconds for any single G-protein to deactivate if other factors did not come into play. Indeed, there are around 30 isoforms of RGS proteins that, when bound to Gα through their GAP domain, accelerate the hydrolysis rate to ≈30 times/sec. This 1500-fold increase in rate allows for the cell to respond to external signals with high speed, as well as spatial resolution due to limited amount of second messenger that can be generated and limited distance a G-protein can diffuse in .03 seconds. For the most part, the RGS proteins are promiscuous in their ability to activate G-proteins, while which RGS is involved in a given signaling pathway seems more determined by the tissue and GPCR involved than anything else. In addition, RGS proteins have the additional function of increasing the rate of GTP-GDP exchange at GPCRs, (i.e., as a sort of co-GEF) further contributing to the time resolution of GPCR signaling.\n\nIn addition, the GPCR may be desensitized itself. This can occur as:\n\n\nOnce β-arrestin is bound to a GPCR, it undergoes a conformational change allowing it to serve as a scaffolding protein for an adaptor complex termed AP-2, which in turn recruits another protein called clathrin. If enough receptors in the local area recruit clathrin in this manner, they aggregate and the membrane buds inwardly as a result of interactions between the molecules of clathrin, in a process called opsonization. Once the pit has been pinched off the plasma membrane due to the actions of two other proteins called amphiphysin and dynamin, it is now an endocytic vesicle. At this point, the adapter molecules and clathrin have dissociated, and the receptor is either trafficked back to the plasma membrane or targeted to lysosomes for degradation.\n\nAt any point in this process, the β-arrestins may also recruit other proteins—such as the non-receptor tyrosine kinase (nRTK), c-SRC—which may activate ERK1/2, or other mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling through, for example, phosphorylation of the small GTP-ase, Ras, or recruit the proteins of the ERK cascade directly (i.e., Raf-1, MEK, ERK-1/2) at which point signaling is initiated due to their close proximity to one another. Another target of c-SRC are the dynamin molecules involved in endocytosis. Dynamins polymerize around the neck of an incoming vesicle, and their phosphorylation by c-SRC provides the energy necessary for the conformational change allowing the final \"pinching off\" from the membrane.\n\nReceptor desensitization is mediated through a combination phosphorylation, β-arr binding, and endocytosis as described above. Downregulation occurs when endocytosed receptor is embedded in an endosome that is trafficked to merge with an organelle called a lysosome. Because lysosomal membranes are rich in proton pumps, their interiors have low pH (≈4.8 vs. the pH≈7.2 cytosol), which acts to denature the GPCRs. In addition, lysosomes contain many degradative enzymes, including proteases, which can function only at such low pH, and so the peptide bonds joining the residues of the GPCR together may be cleaved. Whether or not a given receptor is trafficked to a lysosome, detained in endosomes, or trafficked back to the plasma membrane depends on a variety of factors, including receptor type and magnitude of the signal.\nGPCR regulation is additionally mediated by gene transcription factors. These factors can increase or decrease gene transcription and thus increase or decrease the generation of new receptors (up- or down-regulation) that travel to the cell membrane.\n\nG-protein-coupled receptor oligomerisation is a widespread phenomenon. One of the best-studied examples is the metabotropic GABA receptor. This so-called constitutive receptor is formed by heterodimerization of GABAR1 and GABAR2 subunits. Expression of the GABAR1 without the GABAR2 in heterologous systems leads to retention of the subunit in the endoplasmic reticulum. Expression of the GABAR2 subunit alone, meanwhile, leads to surface expression of the subunit, although with no functional activity (i.e., the receptor does not bind agonist and cannot initiate a response following exposure to agonist). Expression of the two subunits together leads to plasma membrane expression of functional receptor. It has been shown that GABAR2 binding to GABAR1 causes masking of a retention signal of functional receptors.\n\nSignal transduction mediated by the superfamily of GPCRs dates back to the origin of multicellularity. Mammalian-like GPCRs are found in fungi, and have been classified according to the GRAFS classification system based on GPCR fingerprints. Identification of the superfamily members across the eukaryotic domain, and comparison of the family-specific motifs, have shown that the superfamily of GPCRs have a common origin. Characteristic motifs indicate that three of the five GRAFS families, \"Rhodopsin\", \"Adhesion\", and \"Frizzled\", evolved from the \"Dictyostelium discoideum\" cAMP receptors before the split of Opisthokonts. Later, the \"Secretin\" family evolved from the \"Adhesion\" GPCR receptor family before the split of nematodes.\n\n\n\n", "id": "12832", "title": "G protein–coupled receptor"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12833", "text": "GTPase\n\nGTPases (singular GTPase) are a large family of hydrolase enzymes that can bind and hydrolyze guanosine triphosphate (GTP). The GTP binding and hydrolysis takes place in the highly conserved G domain common to all GTPases.\n\nGTPases play an important role in: \n\nThe hydrolysis of the γ phosphate of GTP into guanosine diphosphate (GDP) and P, inorganic phosphate, occurs by the S2 mechanism (see nucleophilic substitution) via a \"pentavalent intermediate state\" and is dependent on the magnesium ion Mg.\n\nIn most GTPases, the specificity for the base guanine is imparted by the base-recognition motif, which has the consensus sequence [N/T]KXD.\n\nRegulatory GTPases, also called the GTPase superfamily, are GTPases used for regulation of other biochemical processes. Most prominent among the regulatory GTPases are the G proteins.\n\nAll regulatory GTPases have a common mechanism that enables them to switch a signal transduction chain on and off. Toggling the switch is performed by the unidirectional change of the GTPase from the \"active, GTP-bound form\" to the \"inactive, GDP-bound form\" by hydrolysis of the GTP through intrinsic GTPase-activity, effectively switching the GTPase \"off\". This reaction is initiated by GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs), coming from another signal transduction pathway. It can be reversed (switching the GTPase \"on\" again) by Guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs), which cause the GDP to dissociate from the GTPase, leading to its association with a new GTP. This closes the cycle to the active state of the GTPase; the irreversible hydrolysis of the GTP to GDP forces the cycle to run only in one direction. Only the active state of the GTPase can transduce a signal to a reaction chain.\n\nThe efficiency of the signal transduction via a GTPase depends on the ratio of active to inactive GTPase. That\n\nequals:\n\nwith \"k\" being the dissociation constant of GDP, and \"k\" the hydrolysis constant of GTP for the specific GTPase. Both constants can be modified by special regulatory proteins.\n\nThe amount of active GTPase can be changed in several ways : \n\nThese G proteins are made from three subunits, with the G domain located on the largest one (the \"α unit\"); together with the two smaller subunits (\"β\" and \"γ units\"), they form a tightly associated protein complex. α and γ unit are associated with the membrane by lipid anchors. Heterotrimeric G proteins act as the specific reaction partners of G protein-coupled receptors. The GTPase is normally inactive. Upon receptor activation, the intracellular receptor domain activates the GTPase, which in turn activates other molecules of the signal transduction chain, either via the α unit or the βγ complex. Among the target molecules of the active GTPase are adenylate cyclase and ion channels. The heterotrimeric G proteins can be classified by sequence homology of the α unit into four families: \nBy combination of different α, β and γ subunits, a great variety (>1000) G proteins can be produced.\nGDP is not needed for GTP.\n\nIn the basic state, the G-GDP-G complex and the receptor that can activate it are separately associated with the membrane. On receptor activation, the receptor becomes highly affine for the G protein - GDP complex. On binding with the complex, GDP dissociates from the complex; the receptor works as a GEF - GDP-GTP Exchange Factor; the \"free\" complex has a high affinity for GTP. Upon GTP binding, both G-GTP and G separate from both the receptor and from each other. Depending on the lifetime of the active state of the receptor, it can activate more G proteins this way.\n\nBoth G-GTP and G can now activate separate and/or the same effector molecules, thus sending the signal further down the signal reaction chain. Once the intrinsic GTPase activity of the α unit has hydrolyzed the GTP to GDP, and then the two parts associate to the original, inactive state. The speed of the hydrolysis reaction works as an internal clock for the length of the signal.\n\nThese are small monomeric proteins homologous to Ras. They are also called small GTPases. Small GTPases have a molecular weight of about 21 kilodaltons and generally serve as molecular switches for a variety of cellular signaling events. According to their primary amino acid sequences and biochemical properties, the Ras superfamily is further divided into five subfamilies: Ras, Rho, Rab, Arf and Ran. The Rho subfamily is further divided into RHOA, RAC1, and CDC42.\n\nThese GTPases play an important role in Initiation, elongation and termination of protein biosynthesis.\n\nSee signal recognition particle (SRP).\n\nSee dynamin as a prototype for large GTPases.\n\n\n", "id": "12833", "title": "GTPase"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12835", "text": "Galla Placidia\n\nAelia Galla Placidia (388 – 27 November 450), daughter of the Roman emperor Theodosius I, was regent to Valentinian III from 423 until his majority in 437, and a major force in Roman politics for most of her life. She was queen consort to Ataulf, king of the Visigoths from 414 until his death in 415, and briefly empress consort to Constantius III in 421.\n\nPlacidia was the daughter of Theodosius I and his second wife, Galla, who was herself daughter of Valentinian I and his second wife, Justina. Her older brother Gratian died young. Her mother died in childbirth in 394, giving birth to John, who died with their mother. Placidia was a younger, paternal half-sister of emperors Arcadius and Honorius. Her older half-sister Pulcheria predeceased her parents according to Gregory of Nyssa, placing the death of Pulcheria prior to the death of Aelia Flaccilla, the first wife of Theodosius I, in 385.\n\nPlacidia was granted her own household by her father in the early 390s and was thus financially independent while underage. She was summoned to the court of her father in Mediolanum during 394. She was present at Theodosius' death on January 17, 395. She was granted the title of \"Nobilissima Puella\" (\"Most Noble Girl\") during her childhood.\n\nPlacidia spent most of her early years in the household of Stilicho the Vandal and his wife, Serena. She is presumed to have learned weaving and embroidery. She might have also been given a classical education, though no details are known. Serena was a first cousin of Arcadius, Honorius and Placidia. The poem \"In Praise of Serena\" by Claudian and the \"Historia Nova\" by Zosimus clarify that Serena's father was an elder Honorius, a brother to Theodosius I. According to \"\"De Consulatu Stilichonis\"\" by Claudian, Placidia was betrothed to Eucherius, only known son of Stilicho and Serena. Her scheduled marriage is mentioned in the text as the third union between Stilicho's family and the Theodosian dynasty, following those of Stilicho to Serena and Maria, their daughter, to Honorius.\n\nStilicho was the magister militum of the Western Roman Empire. He was the only known person to hold the rank of \"magister militum in praesenti\" from 394 to 408 in both the Western and the Eastern Roman Empire. He was also titled \"magister equitum et peditum\" (\"Master of the Horse and of Foot\"), placing him in charge of both the cavalry and infantry forces of the Western Roman Empire. In 408, Arcadius died and was succeeded by his son Theodosius II, only seven years old. Stilicho planned to proceed to Constantinople and \"undertake the management of the affairs of Theodosius\", convincing Honorius not to travel to the East himself. Shortly after, Olympius, \"an officer of rank in the court-guards\" attempted to convince Honorius that Stilicho was in fact conspiring to depose Theodosius II, to replace him with Eucherius. Olympius proceeded to lead a military coup d'état which left him in control of Honorius and his court. Stilicho was arrested and executed on August 22, 408. Eucherius sought refuge in Rome but was arrested there by Arsacius and Tarentius, two eunuchs following imperial command. They executed him not long after. Honorius appointed Tarentius imperial chamberlain, and gave the next post under him to Arsacius. Their deaths left Placidia effectively unattached.\n\nIn the disturbances that followed the fall of Stilicho, throughout the Italian Peninsula the wives and children of the foederati were slain. The foederati were considered loyalists of Stilicho and treated accordingly. The natural consequence of all this was that these men, to the number of 30,000, flocked to the camp of Alaric I, King of the Visigoths, clamouring to be led against their cowardly enemies. Alaric accordingly led them across the Julian Alps and, in September 408, stood before the Aurelian Walls and began a strict blockade. Rome was under siege, with minor interruptions, from 408 to August 24, 410. Zosimus records that Placidia was within the city during the siege. When Serena was accused of conspiring with Alaric, \"the whole senate therefore, with Placidia, uterine sister to the emperor, thought it proper that she should suffer death\". Her reasons for concurring to the execution of her cousin are not stated in the account.\n\nPrior to the fall of Rome, Placidia was captured by Alaric. Her captivity was recorded by both Jordanes and Marcellinus Comes, though the exact circumstances are not mentioned. She followed the Visigoths in their move from the Italian Peninsula to Gaul in 412. Their ruler Ataulf, having succeeded Alaric, entered an alliance with Honorius against Jovinus and Sebastianus, rival Western Roman emperors located in Gaul. He managed to defeat and execute both Gallo-Roman emperors in 413.\n\nAfter the heads of Sebastianus and Jovinus arrived at Honorius' court in Ravenna in late August, to be forwarded for display among other usurpers on the walls of Carthage, relations between Ataulf and Honorius improved sufficiently for Ataulf to cement them by marrying Galla Placidia at Narbonne on January 1, 414. The nuptials were celebrated with high Roman festivities and magnificent gifts from the Gothic booty. Priscus Attalus gave the wedding speech, a classical epithalamium. The marriage was recorded by Hydatius. The historian Jordanes states that they married earlier, in 411 at Forum Livii (Forlì). Jordanes's date may actually be when she and the Gothic king first became more than captor and captive.\n\nPlacidia and Ataulf had a single known son, Theodosius. He was born in Barcelona by the end of 414. Theodosius died early in the following year, thus eliminating an opportunity for a Romano-Visigothic line. Years later the corpse was exhumed and reburied in the imperial mausoleum in Old St. Peter's Basilica, Rome. In Hispania, Ataulf imprudently accepted into his service a man identified as \"Dubius\" or \"Eberwolf\", a former follower of Sarus. Sarus was a Germanic chieftain who was killed while fighting under Jovinus and Sebastianus. His follower harbored a secret desire to avenge the death of his beloved patron. And so, in the palace at Barcelona, the man brought Ataulf's reign to a sudden end by killing him while he bathed in August/September, 415.\n\nThe Amali faction proceeded to proclaim Sigeric, a brother of Sarus, as the next king of the Visigoths. According to \"The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire\" by Edward Gibbon, the first act of Sigeric's reign \"was the inhuman murder\" of Ataulf's six children from a former marriage \"whom he tore, without pity, from the feeble arms of a venerable bishop\" (Sigesar, bishop of the Goths). As for Galla Placidia, as Ataulf's widow, she was \"treated with cruel and wanton insult\" by being forced to walk more than twelve miles on foot among the crowd of captives driven ahead of the mounted Sigeric. Seeing the noble widow's sufferings, however, became one of the factors that roused indignant opponents of the usurper, who quickly assassinated Sigeric and replaced him with Wallia, Ataulf's relative.\n\nAccording to the \"Chronicon Albeldense\", included in the Roda Codex, Wallia was desperate for food supplies. He surrendered to Constantius III, at the time magister militum of Honorius, negotiating terms giving foederati status for the Visigoths. Placidia was returned to Honorius as part of the peace treaty. Her brother Honorius forced her into marriage to Constantius III on January 1, 417. Their daughter Justa Grata Honoria was probably born in 417 or 418. The history of Paul the Deacon mentions her first among the children of the marriage, suggesting that she was the eldest. Their son Valentinian III was born July 2, 419.\n\nPlacidia intervened in the succession crisis following the death of Pope Zosimus on December 26, 418. Two factions of the Roman clergy had proceeded to elect their own popes, the first electing Eulalius (27 December) and the other electing Boniface I (28 December). They acted as rival popes, both in Rome, and their factions plunged the city into tumult. Symmachus, Prefect of Rome, sent his report to the imperial court at Ravenna, requesting an imperial decision on the matter. Placidia and, presumably, Constantius petitioned the emperor in favor of Eulalius. This was arguably the first intervention by an Emperor in the Papal election.\n\nHonorius initially confirmed Eulalius as the legitimate pope. As this failed to put an end to the controversy, Honorius called a synod of Italian bishops at Ravenna to decide the matter. The synod met from February to March 419 but failed to reach a conclusion. Honorius called a second synod in May, this time including Gaulish and African bishops. In the meantime, the two rival popes were ordered to leave Rome. As Easter approached, however, Eulalius returned to the city and attempted to seize the Basilica of St. John Lateran in order to \"preside at the paschal ceremonies\". Imperial troops managed to repel him, and on Easter (March 30, 419) the ceremonies were led by Achilleus, Bishop of Spoleto. The conflict cost Eulalius the imperial favor, and Boniface was proclaimed the legitimate pope as of April 3, 419, returning to Rome a week later. Placidia had personally written to the African bishops, summoning them to the second synod. Three of her letters are known to have survived.\n\nOn February 8, 421, Constantius was proclaimed an Augustus, becoming co-ruler with the childless Honorius. Placidia was proclaimed an Augusta. She was the only Empress in the West, since Honorius had divorced his second wife Thermantia in 408 and had never remarried. Neither title was recognised by Theodosius II, the Eastern Roman Emperor. Constantius reportedly complained about the loss of personal freedom and privacy that came with the imperial office. He died of an illness on September 2, 421.\n\nGalla Placidia herself was now forced from the Western Empire. Though the motivation for this remains unclear, the public issue was the increasingly scandalous public caresses she received from her own brother Honorius—this at least was the interpretation of Olympiodorus of Thebes, a historian used as a source by Zosimus, Sozomen and probably Philostorgius, as J.F. Matthews has postulated. Gibbon had a different opinion: \"The power of Placidia; and the indecent familiarity of her brother, which might be no more than the symptoms of a childish affection, were universally attributed to incestuous love.\"\n\nAccording to Gibbon, \"On a sudden, by some base intrigues of a steward and a nurse, this excessive fondness was converted into an irreconcilable quarrel: the debates of the emperor and his sister were not long confined within the walls of the palace; and as the Gothic soldiers adhered to their queen, the city of Ravenna was agitated with bloody and dangerous tumults, which could only be appeased by the forced or voluntary retreat of Placidia and her children. The royal exiles landed at Constantinople, soon after the marriage of Theodosius, during the festival of the Persian victories. They were treated with kindness and magnificence; but as the statues of the emperor Constantius had been rejected by the Eastern court, the title of Augusta could not decently be allowed to his widow.\" The passage places the arrival of Placidia and her children after the marriage of Theodosius II to Aelia Eudocia, known to have occurred on June 7, 421. The \"Persian victories\" mentioned were probably victory celebrations over the brief Roman–Sasanian War (421–422) under the respective leadership of Theodosius II and Bahram V of the Sasanian Empire. The \"Saracens of Hira\" were the Lakhmids of al-Hirah, a pre-Islamic Arab state that was located in what is now Iraq.\n\nOn August 15, 423, Honorius died of edema, perhaps pulmonary edema. With no member of the Theodosian dynasty present at Ravenna to claim the throne, Theodosius II was expected to nominate a Western co-emperor. However, Theodosius hesitated and the decision was delayed. Taking advantage of the power vacuum, Castinus the Patrician proceeded to become a kingmaker. He declared Joannes, the \"primicerius notariorum\" \"chief notary\" (the head of the civil service), to be the new Western Roman Emperor. Among their supporters was Flavius Aetius. Aetius was a son of Flavius Gaudentius, magister militum, and Aurelia. Joannes' rule was accepted in the provinces of Italia, Gaul and Hispania, but not in the province of Africa.\n\nTheodosius II reacted by preparing Valentinian III for eventual promotion to the imperial office. In 423/424, Valentinian was named \"nobilissimus\". In 424, Valentinian was betrothed to Licinia Eudoxia, his first cousin once removed. She was a daughter of Theodosius II and Aelia Eudocia. The year of their betrothal was recorded by Marcellinus Comes. At the time of their betrothal, Valentinian was approximately four years old, Licinia only two. Gibbon attributes the betrothal to \"the agreement of the three females who governed the Roman world\", meaning Placidia and her nieces Eudocia and Pulcheria. In the same year, Valentinian was proclaimed a Caesar in the Eastern court.\n\nThe campaign against Joannes also started in the same year. Forces of the Eastern Roman army gathered at Thessaloniki, and were placed under the general command of Ardaburius, the victorious general of the Roman-Persian War. The invasion force was to cross the Adriatic Sea by two routes. Aspar, son of Ardaburius, led the cavalry by land, following the coast of the Adriatic from the Western Balkans to Northern Italy. Placidia and Valentinian joined this force. Ardaburius and the infantry boarded ships of the Eastern Roman navy in an attempt to reach Ravenna by sea. Aspar marched his forces to Aquileia, taking the city by surprise and with virtually no resistance. The fleet, on the other hand, was dispersed by a storm. Ardaburius and two of his galleys were captured by forces loyal to Joannes and were held prisoners in Ravenna.\n\nArdaburius was treated well by Joannes, who probably intended to negotiate with Theodosius for an end to the hostilities. The prisoner was allowed the \"courteous freedom\" of walking the court and streets of Ravenna during his captivity. He took advantage of this privilege to come into contact with the forces of Joannes and convinced some of them to defect to Theodosius' side. The conspirators contacted Aspar and beckoned him to Ravenna. A shepherd led Aspar's cavalry force through the marshes of the Po to the gates of Ravenna; with the besiegers outside the walls and the defectors within, the city was quickly captured. Joannes was taken and his right hand cut off; he was then mounted on a donkey and paraded through the streets, and finally beheaded in the hippodrome of Aquileia.\n\nWith Joannes dead, Valentinian was officially proclaimed the new Augustus of the Western Roman Empire on October 23, 425, in the presence of the Roman Senate. Three days following Joannes' death, Aetius brought reinforcements for his army, a reported number of sixty thousand Huns from across the Danube. After some skirmishing, Placidia and Aetius came to an agreement that established the political landscape of the Western Roman Empire for the next thirty years. The Huns were paid off and sent home, while Aetius received the position of \"magister militum per Gallias \"(commander-in-chief of the Roman army in Gaul).\n\nGalla Placidia was regent of the Western Roman Empire from 425 to 437, her regency ending when Valentinian reached his eighteenth birthday on July 2, 437. Among her early supporters was Bonifacius, governor of the Diocese of Africa. Aetius, his rival for influence, managed to secure Arles against Theodoric I of the Visigoths. The Visigoths concluded a treaty and were given Gallic noblemen as hostages. The later Emperor Avitus visited Theodoric, lived at his court and taught his sons.\n\nConflict between Placidia and Bonifacius started in 429. Placidia appointed Bonifacius general of Libya. Procopius records that Aetius played the two against each other, warning Placidia against Bonifacius and advising her to recall him to Rome; simultaneously writing to Bonifacius, warning him that Placidia was about to summon him for no good reason in order to put him away.\n\nBonifacius, trusting the warning from Aetius, refused the summons; and, thinking his position untenable, sought an alliance with the Vandals in Spain. The Vandals subsequently crossed from Spain into Libya to join him. To friends of Bonifacius in Rome, this apparent act of hostility toward the Empire seemed entirely out of character for Bonifacius. They traveled to Carthage at Placidia's behest to intercede with him, and he showed them the letter from Aetius. The plot now revealed, his friends returned to Rome to apprise Placidia of the true situation. She did not move against Aetius, as he wielded great influence, and as the Empire was already in danger; but she urged Bonifacius to return to Rome \"and not to permit the empire of the Romans to lie under the hand of barbarians.\"\n\nBonifacius now regretted his alliance with the Vandals and tried to persuade them to return to Spain. Genseric offered battle instead, and Bonifacius was besieged at Hippo Regius in Numidia by the sea. (Augustine of Hippo was its bishop and died in this siege.) Unable to take the city, the Vandals eventually raised the siege. The Romans, with reinforcements under Aspar, renewed the struggle but were routed and lost Africa to the Vandals.\n\nBonifacius had meanwhile returned to Rome, where Placidia raised him to the rank of patrician and made him \"master-general of the Roman armies\". Aetius returned from Gaul with an army of \"barbarians\", and was met by Bonifacius in the bloody Battle of Ravenna (432). Bonifacius won the battle, but was mortally wounded and died a few days later. Aetius was compelled to retire to Pannonia.\n\nWith the generals loyal to her having either died or defected to Aetius, Placidia acknowledged the inevitable: Aetius was recalled from exile in 433 and given the titles \"magister militum\" and \"Patrician\". The appointments effectively left Aetius in control of the entire Western Roman Army and gave him considerable influence over imperial policy. Placidia continued to act as regent until 437, though her direct influence over decisions was diminished. She would continue to exercise political influence until her death in 450—no longer, however, the only power at court.\n\nAetius later played a pivotal role in the defense of the Western Empire against Attila. Attila was diverted from Constantinople towards Italy by a letter from Placidia's own daughter Justa Grata Honoria in the spring of 450, asking him to rescue her from an unwanted marriage to a Roman senator that the Imperial family, including Placidia, was trying to force upon her. Honoria included her engagement ring with the letter. Though Honoria may not have intended a proposal of marriage, Attila chose to interpret her message as such. He accepted, asking for half of the western Empire as dowry. When Valentinian discovered the plan, only the influence of Placidia persuaded him not to kill Honoria. Valentinian wrote to Attila denying the legitimacy of the supposed marriage proposal. Attila, unconvinced, sent an emissary to Ravenna to proclaim that Honoria was innocent, that the proposal had been legitimate, and that he would come to claim what was rightfully his. Honoria was quickly married to Flavius Bassus Herculanus, though this did not prevent Attila from pressing his claim.\n\nPlacidia died shortly afterwards at Rome in November 450, and did not live to see Attila ravage Italy in 451–453, in a much more brutal campaign than the Goths had waged, using Justa's letter as his sole \"legitimate\" excuse.\n\nPlacidia was a devout Chalcedonian Christian. She was involved in the building and restoration of various churches throughout her period of influence. She restored and expanded the Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls in Rome and the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem. She built San Giovanni Evangelista, Ravenna in thanks for the sparing of her life and those of her children in a storm while crossing the Adriatic Sea. The dedicatory inscription reads \"Galla Placidia, along with her son Placidus Valentinian Augustus and her daughter Justa Grata Honoria Augusta, paid off their vow for their liberation from the danger of the sea.\"\n\nHer Mausoleum in Ravenna was one of the UNESCO World Heritage Sites inscribed in 1996. However, there is some doubt whether the building served as her tomb. The building was initially erected as a chapel dedicated to Lawrence of Rome. It is unknown whether the sarcophagi therein contained the bodies of the members of the Theodosian dynasty, or when they were placed in the building.\n\n\n\n \n\n\n\n", "id": "12835", "title": "Galla Placidia"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12837", "text": "Galicia (Spain)\n\nGalicia (, ; ; ; Galician and Portuguese: \"Galiza\", , ) is an autonomous community of Spain and historic nationality under Spanish law. Located in the North-West of the Iberian Peninsula, it comprises the provinces of A Coruña, Lugo, Ourense and Pontevedra, being bordered by Portugal to the south, the Spanish autonomous communities of Castile and León and Asturias to the east, the Atlantic Ocean to the west, and the Cantabrian Sea to the north. It had a population of 2,718,525 in 2016 and has a total area of . Galicia has over of coastline, including its offshore islands and islets, among them Cíes Islands, Ons, Sálvora, Cortegada, and—the largest and most populated—A Illa de Arousa.\n\nThe area now called Galicia was first inhabited by humans during the Middle Paleolithic period, and it takes its name from the Gallaeci, the Celtic people living north of the Douro River during the last millennium BC, in a region largely coincidental with that of the Iron Age local Castro culture. Galicia was incorporated into the Roman Empire at the end of the Cantabrian Wars in 19 BC, and was made a Roman province in the 3rd century AD. In 410, the Germanic Suebi established a kingdom with its capital in Braga (Portugal); this kingdom was incorporated into that of the Visigoths in 585. In 711, the Islamic Umayyad Caliphate invaded the Iberian Peninsula conquering the Visigoth kingdom of Hispania by 718, but soon Galicia was incorporated into the Christian kingdom of Asturias by 740. During the Middle Ages, the kingdom of Galicia was occasionally ruled by its own kings, but most of the time it was leagued to the kingdom of Leon and later to that of Castile, while maintaining its own legal and customary practices and culture. From the 13th century on, the kings of Castile, as kings of Galicia, appointed an \"Adiantado-mór\", whose attributions passed to the \"Governor and Captain General of the Kingdom of Galiza\" from the last years of the 15th century. The Governor also presided the \"Real Audiencia do Reino de Galicia\", a royal tribunal and government body. From the 16th century, the representation and voice of the kingdom was held by an assembly of deputies and representatives of the cities of the kingdom, the \"Cortes\" or \"Junta of the Kingdom of Galicia.\" This institution was forcibly discontinued in 1833 when the kingdom was divided into four administrative provinces with no legal mutual links. During the 19th and 20th centuries, demand grew for self-government and for the recognition of the culture of Galicia. This resulted in the Statute of Autonomy of 1936, soon frustrated by Franco's \"coup d'etat\" and subsequent long dictatorship. After democracy was restored the legislature passed the Statute of Autonomy of 1981, approved in referendum and currently in force, providing Galicia with self-government.\n\nThe interior of Galicia is characterized by a hilly landscape; mountain ranges rise to in the east and south. The coastal areas are mostly an alternate series of \"rías\" and cliffs. The climate of Galicia is usually temperate and rainy, with markedly drier summers; it is usually classified as Oceanic. Its topographic and climatic conditions have made animal husbandry and farming the primary source of Galicia's wealth for most of its history, allowing for a relative high density of population. With the exception of shipbuilding and food processing, Galicia was based on a farming and fishing economy until after the mid-20th century, when it began to industrialize. In 2012, the gross domestic product at purchasing power parity was €56,000 million, with a nominal GDP per capita of €20,700. The population is largely concentrated in two main areas: from Ferrol to A Coruña in the northern coast, and in the Rías Baixas region in the southwest, including the cities of Vigo, Pontevedra, and the interior city of Santiago de Compostela. There are smaller populations around the interior cities of Lugo and Ourense. The political capital is Santiago de Compostela, in the province of A Coruña. Vigo, in the province of Pontevedra, is the most populous municipality, with 292,817 (2016), while A Coruña is the most populous city, with 215,227 (2014).\n\nTwo languages are official and widely used today in Galicia: the native Galician, a Romance language closely related to Portuguese, with which it shares Galician-Portuguese medieval literature, and the Spanish language, usually known locally as \"Castilian.\" 56% of the Galician population speak Galician as their first language, while 43% speak more in Castilian.\nThe name \"Galicia\" derives from the Latin toponym Callaecia, later \"Gallaecia,\" related to the name of an ancient Celtic tribe that resided north of the Douro river, the Gallaeci or Callaeci in Latin, or (\"Kallaïkoí\") in Greek. These \"Callaeci\" were the first tribe in the area to help the Lusitanians against the invading Romans. The Romans applied their name to all the other tribes in the northwest who spoke the same language and lived the same life.\n\nThe etymology of the name has been studied since the 7th century by authors such as Isidore of Seville, who wrote that \"Galicians are called so, because of their fair skin, as the Gauls\", relating the name to the Greek word for milk. In the 21st century, scholars derive the name of the ancient Callaeci either from Proto-Indo-European *kal-n-eH 'hill', through a local relational suffix -aik-, so meaning 'the hill (people)'; or either from Proto-Celtic *kallī- 'forest', so meaning 'the forest (people)'. In any case, \"Galicia\", being \"per se\" a derivation of the ethnic name \"Kallaikói,\" means 'the land of the Galicians'.\n\nThe name evolved during the Middle Ages from \"Gallaecia,\" sometimes written \"Galletia,\" to \"Gallicia\". In the 13th century, with the written emergence of the Galician language, \"Galiza\" became the most usual written form of the name of the country, being replaced during the 15th and 16th centuries by the current form, \"Galicia.\" This coincides with the spelling of the Castilian Spanish name. The historical denomination \"Galiza\" became popular again during the end of the 19th and the first three-quarters of the 20th century, and is still used with some frequency today. The Xunta de Galicia, the local devolved government, uses 'Galicia.' The Royal Galician Academy, the institution responsible for regulating the Galician language, whilst recognizing 'Galiza' as a legitimate current denomination, has stated that the only official name of the country is \"Galicia\".\n\nThe oldest attestation of human presence in Galicia has been found in the Eirós Cave, in the municipality of Triacastela, which has preserved animal remains and Neanderthal stone objects from the Middle Paleolithic. The earliest culture to have left significant architectural traces is the Megalithic culture, which expanded along the western European coasts during the Neolithic and Calcolithic eras. Thousands of Megalithic tumuli are distributed throughout the country, but mostly along the coastal areas. Within each tumulus is a stone burial chamber known locally as \"anta\" (dolmen), frequently preceded by a corridor. Galicia was later influenced by the Bell Beaker culture. Its rich mineral deposits of tin and gold led to the development of Bronze Age metallurgy, and to the commerce of bronze and gold items all along the Atlantic coast of Western Europe. A shared elite culture evolved in this region during the Atlantic Bronze Age.\nDating from the end of the Megalithic era, and up to the Bronze Age, numerous stone carvings (petroglyphs) are found in open air. They usually represent cup and ring marks, labyrinths, deer, Bronze Age weapons, and riding and hunting scenes. Large numbers of these stone carvings can be found in the Rías Baixas regions, at places such as Tourón and Campo Lameiro.\nThe Castro culture ('Culture of the Castles') developed during the Iron Age, and flourished during the second half of the first millennium BC. It is usually considered a local evolution of the Atlantic Bronze Age, with later developments and influences and overlapping into the Roman era. Geographically, it corresponds to the people Roman called Gallaeci, which were composed by a large series of nations or tribes, among them the \"Artabri\", \"Bracari\", \"Limici\", \"Celtici\", \"Albiones\" and \"Lemavi\". They were capable fighters: Strabo described them as the most difficult foes the Romans encountered in conquering Lusitania, while Appian mentions their warlike spirit, noting that the women bore their weapons side by side with their men, frequently preferring death to captivity. According to Pomponius Mela all the inhabitants of the coastal areas were Celtic people.\nGallaeci lived in \"castros\". These were usually annular forts, with one or more concentric earthen or stony walls, with a trench in front of each one. They were frequently located at hills, or in seashore cliffs and peninsulas. Some well known \"castros\" can be found, in the seashore, at Fazouro, Santa Tegra, Baroña and O Neixón, and inland at San Cibrao de Lás, Borneiro, Castromao, and Viladonga. Some other distinctive features, such as temples, baths, reservoirs, warrior statues and decorative carvings have been found associated to this culture, together with rich gold and metalworking traditions.\n\nThe Roman legions first entered the area under Decimus Junius Brutus in 137–136 BC, but the country was only incorporated into the Roman Empire by the time of Augustus (29 BC – 19 BC). The Romans were interested in Galicia mainly for its mineral resources, most notably gold. Under Roman rule, most Galician hillforts began to be – sometimes forcibly – abandoned, and Gallaeci served frequently in the Roman army as auxiliary troops. Romans brought new technologies, new travel routes, new forms of organizing property, and a new language; latin. The Roman Empire established its control over Galicia through camps (\"castra\") as \"Aquis Querquennis\", Ciadella camp or Lucus Augusti (Lugo), roads (\"viae\") and monuments as the lighthouse known as \"Tower of Hercules\", in Corunna, but the remoteness and lesser interest of the country since the 2nd century of our era, when the gold mines stopped being productive, led to a lesser degree of \"Romanization\". In the 3rd century it was made a province, under the name Gallaecia, which included also northern Portugal, Asturias, and a large section of what today is known as Castile and León.\n\nIn the early 5th century, the deep crisis suffered by the Roman Empire allowed different tribes of Central Europe (Suebi, Vandals and Alani) to cross the Rhine and penetrate into the rule on 31 December 406. Its progress towards the Iberian Peninsula forced the Roman authorities to establish a treaty (\"foedus\") by which the Suebi would settle peacefully and govern Galicia as imperial allies. So, from 409 Galicia was taken by the Suebi, forming the first medieval kingdom to be created in Europe, in 411, even before the fall of the Roman Empire, being also the first Germanic kingdom to mint coinage in Roman lands. During this period a Briton colony and bishopric (see Mailoc) was established in Northern Galicia (Britonia), probably as foederati and allies of the Suebi. In 585, the Visigothic King Leovigild invaded the Suebic kingdom of Galicia and defeated it, bringing it under Visigoth control.\n\nLater the Muslims invaded Spain (711), but the Arabs and Moors never managed to have any real control over Galicia, which was later incorporated into the expanding Christian Kingdom of Asturias, usually known as Gallaecia or Galicia (\"Yillīqiya\" and \"Galīsiya\") by Muslim Chroniclers, as well as by many European contemporaries. This era consolidated Galicia as a Christian society which spoke a Romance language. During the next century Galician noblemen took northern Portugal, conquering Coimbra in 871, thus freeing what were considered the southernmost city of ancient Galicia.\n\nIn the 9th century, the rise of the cult of the Apostle James in Santiago de Compostela gave Galicia a particular symbolic importance among Christians, an importance it would hold throughout the \"Reconquista\". As the Middle Ages went on, Santiago became a major pilgrim destination and the Way of Saint James (Camiño de Santiago) a major pilgrim road, a route for the propagation of Romanesque art and the words and music of the troubadors. During the 10th and 11th centuries, a period during which Galician nobility become related to the royal family, Galicia was at times headed by its own native kings, while Vikings (locally known as \"Leodemanes\" or \"Lordomanes\") occasionally raided the coasts. The Towers of Catoira (Pontevedra) were built as a system of fortifications to prevent and stop the Viking raids on Santiago de Compostela.\n\nIn 1063, Ferdinand I of Castile divided his realm among his sons, and the Kingdom of Galicia was granted to Garcia II of Galicia. In 1072, it was forcibly annexed by Garcia's brother Alfonso VI of León; from that time Galicia was united with the Kingdom of León under the same monarchs. In the 13th century Alfonso X of Castile standardized the Castilian language and made it the language of court and government. Nevertheless, in his Kingdom of Galicia the Galician language was the only language spoken, and the most used in government and legal uses, as well as in literature.\nDuring the 14th and 15th centuries, the progressive distancing of the kings from Galician affairs left the kingdom in the hands of the local knights, counts and bishops, who frequently fought each other to increase their fiefs, or simply to plunder the lands of others. At the same time, the deputies of the Kingdom in the \"Cortes\" stopped being called. The Kingdom of Galicia, slipping away from the control of the King, responded with a century of fiscal insubordination.\nOn the other hand, the lack of an effective royal justice system in the Kingdom led to the social conflict known as the \"Guerras Irmandiñas\" ('Wars of the brotherhoods'), when leagues of peasants and burghers, with the support of a number of knights, noblemen, and under legal protection offered by the remote king, toppled many of the castles of the Kingdom and briefly drove the noblemen into Portugal and Castile. Soon after, in the late 15th century, in the dynastic conflict between Isabella I of Castile and Joanna La Beltraneja, part of the Galician aristocracy supported Joanna. After Isabella's victory, she initiated an administrative and political reform which the chronicler Jeronimo Zurita defined as \"doma del Reino de Galicia\": 'It was then when the taming of Galicia began, because not just the local lords and knights, but all the people of that nation were the ones against the others very bold and warlike'. These reforms, while establishing a local government and tribunal (the \"Real Audiencia del Reino de Galicia\") and bringing the nobleman under submission, also brought most Galician monasteries and institutions under Castilian control, in what has been criticized as a process of centralisation. At the same time the kings began to call the \"Xunta\" or \"Cortes\" of the Kingdom of Galicia, an assembly of deputies or representatives of the cities of the Kingdom, to ask for monetary and military contributions. This assembly soon developed into the voice and legal representation of the Kingdom, and the depositary of its will and laws.\n\nThe modern period of the kingdom of Galicia began with the murder or defeat of some of the most powerful Galician lords, such as Pedro Álvarez de Sotomayor, called Pedro Madruga, and Rodrigo Henriquez Osorio, at the hands of the Castilian armies sent to Galicia between the years 1480 and 1486. Isabella I of Castile, considered a usurper by many Galician nobles, eradicated all armed resistance and definitively established the royal power of the Castilian monarchy. Fearing a general revolt, the monarchs ordered the banishing of the rest of the great lords like Pedro de Bolaño, Diego de Andrade or Lope Sánchez de Moscoso, among others.\nThe establishment of the Santa Hermandad in 1480, and of the Real Audiencia del Reino de Galicia in 1500—a tribunal and executive body directed by the Governor-Captain General as a direct representative of the King—implied initially the submission of the Kingdom to the Crown, after a century of unrest and fiscal insubordination. As a result, from 1480 to 1520 the Kingdom of Galicia contributed more than 10% of the total earnings of the Crown of Castille, including the Americas, well over its economic relevance. Like the rest of Spain, the 16th century was marked by population growth up to 1580, when the simultaneous wars with the Netherlands, France and England hampered Galicia's Atlantic commerce, which consisted mostly in the exportation of sardines, wood, and some cattle and wine.\n\nIn the late years of the 15th century the written form of the Galician language began a slow decline as it was increasingly replaced by Spanish, which would culminate in the \"Séculos Escuros\" \"the Dark Centuries\" of the language, roughly from the 16th century through to the mid-18th century, when written Galician almost completely disappeared except for private or occasional uses but the spoken language remained the common language of the people in the villages and even the cities.\nFrom that moment Galicia, which participated to a minor extent in the American expansion of the Spanish Empire, found itself at the center of the Atlantic wars fought by Spain against the French and the Protestant powers of England and the Netherlands, whose privateers attacked the coastal areas, but major assaults were not common as the coastline was difficult and the harbors easily defended. The most famous assaults were upon the city of Vigo by Sir Francis Drake in 1585 and 1589, and the siege of A Coruña in 1589 by the \"English Armada\". Galicia also suffered occasional slave raids by Barbary pirates, but not as frequently as the Mediterranean coastal areas. The most famous Barbary attack was the bloody sack of the town of Cangas in 1617. At the time, the king's petitions for money and troops became more frequent, due to the human and economic exhaustion of Castile; the Junta of the Kingdom of Galicia (the local \"Cortes\" or representative assembly) was initially receptive to these petitions, raising large sums, accepting the conscription of the men of the kingdom, and even commissioning a new naval squadron which was sustained with the incomes of the Kingdom.\nAfter the rupture of the wars with Portugal and Catalonia, the \"Junta\" changed its attitude, this time due to the exhaustion of Galicia, now involved not just in naval or oversea operations, but also in an exhausting war with the Portuguese, war which produced thousands of casualties and refugees and was heavily disturbing to the local economy and commerce. So, in the second half of the 17th century the \"Junta\" frequently denied or considerably reduced the initial petitions of the monarch, and though the tension didn't rise to the levels experienced in Portugal or Catalonia, there were frequent urban mutinies and some voices even asked for the secession of the Kingdom of Galicia.\n\nDuring the Peninsular War the successful uprising of the local people against the new French authorities, together with the support of the British Army, limited the occupation to a six-month period in 1808-1809. During the pre-war period the Supreme Council of the Kingdom of Galicia (\"Junta Suprema del Reino de Galicia\"), auto-proclaimed interim sovereign in 1808, was the sole government of the country and mobilized near 40,000 men against the invaders.\n\nThe 1833 territorial division of Spain put a formal end to the Kingdom of Galicia, unifying Spain into a single centralized monarchy. Instead of seven provinces and a regional administration, Galicia was reorganized into the current four provinces. Although it was recognized as a \"historical region\", that status was strictly honorific. In reaction, nationalist and federalist movements arose.\nThe liberal General Miguel Solís Cuetos led a separatist coup attempt in 1846 against the authoritarian regime of Ramón María Narváez. Solís and his forces were defeated at the Battle of Cacheiras, 23 April 1846, and the survivors, including Solís himself, were shot. They have taken their place in Galician memory as the Martyrs of Carral or simply the Martyrs of Liberty.\n\nDefeated on the military front, Galicians turned to culture. The \"Rexurdimento\" focused on recovery of the Galician language as a vehicle of social and cultural expression. Among the writers associated with this movement are Rosalía de Castro, Manuel Murguía, Manuel Leiras Pulpeiro, and Eduardo Pondal.\n\nIn the early 20th century came another turn toward nationalist politics with \"Solidaridad Gallega\" (1907–1912) modeled on \"Solidaritat Catalana\" in Catalonia. Solidaridad Gallega failed, but in 1916 \"Irmandades da Fala\" (Brotherhood of the Language) developed first as a cultural association but soon as a full-blown nationalist movement. Vicente Risco and Ramón Otero Pedrayo were outstanding cultural figures of this movement, and the magazine \"Nós\" ('Us'), founded 1920, its most notable cultural institution, Lois Peña Novo the outstanding political figure.\n\nThe Second Spanish Republic was declared in 1931. During the republic, the Partido Galeguista (PG) was the most important of a shifting collection of Galician nationalist parties. Following a referendum on a Galician Statute of Autonomy, Galicia was granted the status of an autonomous region.\nGalicia was spared the worst of the fighting in that war: it was one of the areas where the initial coup attempt at the outset of the war was successful, and it remained in Nationalist (Franco's army's) hands throughout the war. While there were no pitched battles, there was repression and death: all political parties were abolished, as were all labor unions and Galician nationalist organizations as the \"Seminario de Estudos Galegos\". Galicia's statute of autonomy was annulled (as were those of Catalonia and the Basque provinces once those were conquered). According to Carlos Fernández Santander, at least 4,200 people were killed either extrajudicially or after summary trials, among them republicans, communists, Galician nationalists, socialists and anarchists. Victims included the civil governors of all four Galician provinces; Juana Capdevielle, the wife of the governor of A Coruña; mayors such as Ánxel Casal of Santiago de Compostela, of the Partido Galeguista; prominent socialists such as Jaime Quintanilla in Ferrol and Emilio Martínez Garrido in Vigo; Popular Front deputies Antonio Bilbatúa, José Miñones, Díaz Villamil, Ignacio Seoane, and former deputy Heraclio Botana); soldiers who had not joined the rebellion, such as Generals Rogelio Caridad Pita and Enrique Salcedo Molinuevo and Admiral Antonio Azarola; and the founders of the PG, Alexandre Bóveda and Víctor Casas, as well as other professionals akin to republicans and nationalists, as the journalist Manuel Lustres Rivas or physician Luis Poza Pastrana. Many others were forced to escape into exile, or were victims of other reprisals and removed from their jobs and positions.\n\nGeneral Francisco Franco — himself a Galician from Ferrol — ruled as dictator from the civil war until his death in 1975. Franco's centralizing regime suppressed any official use of the Galician language, including the use of Galician names for newborns, although its everyday oral use was not forbidden. Among the attempts at resistance were small leftist guerrilla groups such as those led by José Castro Veiga (\"El Piloto\") and Benigno Andrade (\"Foucellas\"), both of whom were ultimately captured and executed. In the 1960s, ministers such as Manuel Fraga Iribarne introduced some reforms allowing technocrats affiliated with Opus Dei to modernize administration in a way that facilitated capitalist economic development. However, for decades Galicia was largely confined to the role of a supplier of raw materials and energy to the rest of Spain, causing environmental havoc and leading to a wave of migration to Venezuela and to various parts of Europe. Fenosa, the monopolistic supplier of electricity, built hydroelectric dams, flooding many Galician river valleys.\n\nThe Galician economy finally began to modernize with a Citroën factory in Vigo, the modernization of the canning industry and the fishing fleet, and eventually a modernization of small peasant farming practices, especially in the production of cows' milk. In the province of Ourense, businessman and politician Eulogio Gómez Franqueira gave impetus to the raising of livestock and poultry by establishing the Cooperativa Orensana S.A. (Coren).\n\nDuring the last decade of Franco's rule, there was a renewal of nationalist feeling in Galicia. The early 1970s were a time of unrest among university students, workers, and farmers. In 1972, general strikes in Vigo and Ferrol cost the lives of Amador Rey and Daniel Niebla. Later, the bishop of Mondoñedo-Ferrol, Miguel Anxo Araúxo Iglesias, wrote a pastoral letter that was not well received by the Franco regime, about a demonstration in Bazán (Ferrol) where two workers died.\n\nAs part of the transition to democracy upon the death of Franco in 1975, Galicia regained its status as an autonomous region within Spain with the Statute of Autonomy of 1981, which begins, \"Galicia, historical nationality, is constituted as an Autonomous Community to access to its self-government, in agreement with the Spanish Constitution and with the present Statute (...)\". Varying degrees of nationalist or independentist sentiment are evident at the political level. The \"Bloque Nacionalista Galego\" or BNG, is a conglomerate of left-wing parties and individuals that claims Galician political status as a nation.\nFrom 1990 to 2005, Manuel Fraga, former minister and ambassador in the Franco dictature, presided over the Galician autonomous government, the Xunta de Galicia. Fraga was associated with the \"Partido Popular\" ('People's Party', Spain's main national conservative party) since its founding. In 2002, when the oil tanker Prestige sank and covered the Galician coast in oil, Fraga was accused by the grassroots movement \"Nunca Mais\" (\"Never again\") of having been unwilling to react. In the 2005 Galician elections, the 'People's Party' lost its absolute majority, though remaining (barely) the largest party in the parliament, with 43% of the total votes. As a result, power passed to a coalition of the \"Partido dos Socialistas de Galicia\" (PSdeG) ('Galician Socialists' Party'), a federal sister-party of Spain's main social-democratic party, the \"Partido Socialista Obrero Español\" (PSOE, 'Spanish Socialist Workers Party') and the nationalist \"Bloque Nacionalista Galego\" (BNG). As the senior partner in the new coalition, the PSdeG nominated its leader, Emilio Perez Touriño, to serve as Galicia's new president, with Anxo Quintana, the leader of BNG, as its vice president.\n\nIn 2009, the PSdG-BNG coalition lost the elections and the government went back to the People's Party (conservative), even though the PSdG-BNG coalition actually obtained the most votes. Alberto Núñez Feijóo (PPdG) is now Galicia's president.\n\nIn 2012 several parties and individuals abandoned the BNG. Encontro Irmandiño abandoned the bloc and joined with Fronte Obreira Galega, the FPG, Movemento pola Base and other collectives to form Anova-Nationalist Brotherhood. Anova obtained 9 seats in the 2012 Galician election as part of the Galician Left Alternative coalition. BNG obtained 7 seats and PPdG won the elections again.\n\nGalicia has a surface area of . Its northernmost point, at 43°47′N, is Estaca de Bares (also the northernmost point of Spain); its southernmost, at 41°49′N, is on the Portuguese border in the Baixa Limia-Serra do Xurés Natural Park. The easternmost longitude is at 6°42′W on the border between the province of Ourense and the Castilian-Leonese province of Zamora) its westernmost at 9°18′W, reached in two places: the A Nave Cape in Fisterra (also known as Finisterre), and Cape Touriñán, both in the province of A Coruña.\n\nThe interior of Galicia is a hilly landscape, composed of relatively low mountain ranges, usually below high, without sharp peaks, rising to in the eastern mountains. There are many rivers, most (though not all) running down relatively gentle slopes in narrow river valleys, though at times their courses become far more rugged, as in the canyons of the Sil river, Galicia's second most important river after the Miño.\nTopographically, a remarkable feature of Galicia is the presence of many firth-like inlets along the coast, estuaries that were drowned with rising sea levels after the ice age. These are called \"rías\" and are divided into the smaller \"Rías Altas\" (\"High Rías\"), and the larger \"Rías Baixas\" (\"Low Rías\"). The \"Rías Altas\" include Ribadeo, Foz, Viveiro, Barqueiro, Ortigueira, Cedeira, Ferrol, Betanzos, A Coruña, Corme e Laxe and Camariñas. The Rías Baixas, found south of Fisterra, include Corcubión, Muros e Noia, Arousa, Pontevedra and Vigo. The Rías Altas can sometimes refer only to those east of Estaca de Bares, with the others being called \"Rías Medias\" (\"Intermediate Rías\").\n\nErosion by the Atlantic Ocean has contributed to the great number of capes. Besides the aforementioned Estaca de Bares in the far north, separating the Atlantic Ocean from the Cantabrian Sea, other notable capes are Cape Ortegal, Cape Prior, Punta Santo Adrao, Cape Vilán, Cape Touriñán (westernmost point in Galicia), Cape Finisterre or Fisterra, considered by the Romans, along with Finistère in Brittany and Land's End in Cornwall, to be the end of the known world.\nAll along the Galician coast are various archipelagos near the mouths of the \"rías\". These archipelagos provide protected deepwater harbors and also provide habitat for seagoing birds. A 2007 inventory estimates that the Galician coast has 316 archipelagos, islets, and freestanding rocks. Among the most important of these are the archipelagos of Cíes, Ons, and Sálvora. Together with Cortegada Island, these make up the Atlantic Islands of Galicia National Park. Other significant islands are Islas Malveiras, Islas Sisargas, and, the largest and holding the largest population, Arousa Island.\n\nThe coast of this 'green corner' of the Iberian Peninsula, some in length, attracts great numbers of tourists, although real estate development in the 2000–2010 decade have degraded it partially.\nGalicia is quite mountainous, a fact which has contributed to isolate the rural areas, hampering communications, most notably in the inland. The main mountain range is the Macizo Galaico (Serra do Eixe, Serra da Lastra, Serra do Courel), also known as \"Macizo Galaico-Leonés\", located in the eastern parts, bordering with Castile and León. Noteworthy mountain ranges are O Xistral (northern Lugo), the Serra dos Ancares (on the border with León and Asturias), O Courel (on the border with León), O Eixe (the border between Ourense and Zamora), Serra de Queixa (in the center of Ourense province), O Faro (the border between Lugo and Pontevedra), Cova da Serpe (border of Lugo and A Coruña), Montemaior (A Coruña), Montes do Testeiro, Serra do Suído, and Faro de Avión (between Pontevedra and Ourense); and, to the south, A Peneda, O Xurés and O Larouco, all on the border of Ourense and Portugal.\n\nThe highest point in Galicia is Trevinca or Pena Trevinca (), located in the Serra do Eixe, at the border between Ourense and León and Zamora provinces. Other tall peaks are Pena Survia () in the Serra do Eixe, O Mustallar () in Os Ancares, and Cabeza de Manzaneda () in Serra de Queixa, where there is a ski resort.\n\nGalicia is poetically known as the \"country of the thousand rivers\" (\"o país dos mil ríos\"). The largest and most important of these rivers is the Miño, poetically known as \"O Pai Miño\" (Father Miño), which is long and discharges per second, with its affluent the Sil, which has created a spectacular canyon. Most of the rivers in the inland are tributaries of this river system, which drains some . Other rivers run directly into the Atlantic Ocean or the Cantabrian Sea, most of them having short courses. Only the Navia, Ulla, Tambre, and Limia have courses longer than .\n\nGalicia's many hydroelectric dams take advantage of the steep, deep, narrow rivers and their canyons. Due to their steep course, few of Galicia's rivers are navigable, other than the lower portion of the Miño and the portions of various rivers that have been dammed into reservoirs. Some rivers are navigable by small boats in their lower reaches: this is taken great advantage of in a number of semi-aquatic festivals and pilgrimages.\n\nGalicia has preserved some of its dense forests. It is relatively unpolluted, and its landscapes composed of green hills, cliffs and \"rias\" are generally different from what is commonly understood as Spanish landscape. Nevertheless, Galicia has some important environmental problems.\n\nDeforestation and forest fires are a problem in many areas, as is the continual spread of the eucalyptus tree, a species imported from Australia, actively promoted by the paper industry since the mid-20th century. Galicia is one of the more forested areas of Spain, but the majority of Galicia's plantations, usually growing eucalyptus or pine, lack any formal management. Massive eucalyptus plantation, especially of \"Eucalyptus globulus \", began in the Francisco Franco era, largely on behalf of the paper company Empresa Nacional de Celulosas de España (ENCE) in Pontevedra, which wanted it for its pulp. Wood products figure significantly in Galicia's economy. Apart from tree plantations Galicia is also notable for the extensive surface occupied by meadows used for animal husbandry, especially cattle, an important activity. Hydroelectric development in most rivers has been a serious concern for local conservationists during the last decades.\n\nFauna, most notably the European wolf, has suffered because of the actions of livestock owners and farmers, and because of the loss of habitats, whilst the native deer species have declined because of hunting and development.\n\nOil spills are a major issue. The Prestige oil spill in 2002 spilt more oil than the Exxon Valdez in Alaska.\n\nGalicia has more than 2,800 plant species. Plant endemics are represented by 31 taxons. A few oak forests (known locally as \"fragas\") remain, particularly in the north-central part of the province of Lugo and the north of the province of A Coruña (Fragas do Eume).\nGalicia has 262 inventoried species of vertebrates, including 12 species of freshwater fish, 15 amphibians, 24 reptiles, 152 birds, and 59 mammals.\n\nThe animals most often thought of as being \"typical\" of Galicia are the livestock raised there. The Galician horse is native to the region, as is the Galician Blond cow and the domestic fowl known as the \"galiña de Mos\". The latter is an endangered species, although it is showing signs of a comeback since 2001.\nGalicia's woodlands and mountains are home to rabbits, hares, wild boars, and roe deer, all of which are popular with hunters. Several important bird migration routes pass through Galicia, and some of the community's relatively few environmentally protected areas are Special Protection Areas (such as on the Ría de Ribadeo) for these birds. From a domestic point of view, Galicia has been credited for author Manuel Rivas as the \"land of one million cows\". Galician Blond and Holstein cattle coexist on meadows and farms.\n\nBeing located on the Atlantic coastline, Galicia has a very mild climate for the latitude and the marine influence affects most of the province to various degrees. In comparison to similar latitudes on the other side of the Atlantic, winters are exceptionally mild, with consistently heavy rainfall. Snow is rare due to temperatures rarely dropping below freezing. The warmest coastal station of Pontevedra has a yearly mean temperature of . Ourense located somewhat inland is only slightly warmer with . Due to its exposed north-westerly location, the climate is still very cool by Spanish standards. In coastal areas summers are temperered, averaging around in Vigo. Temperatures are further cooler in A Coruña, with a subdued normal. Temperatures do however soar in inland areas such as Ourense, where days above are very regular.\n\nThe lands of Galicia are ascribed to two different areas in the Köppen climate classification: a south area (roughly, the province of Ourense and Pontevedra) with tendencies to have some summer drought, classified as a warm-summer Mediterranean climate (\"Csb\"), with mild temperatures and rainfall usual throughout the year; and the western and northern coastal regions, the provinces of Lugo and A Coruña, which are characterized by their Oceanic climate (\"Cfb\"), with a more uniform precipitation distribution along the year, and milder summers. However, precipitation in southern coastal areas are often classified as oceanic since the averages remain significantly higher than a typical mediterranean climate.\n\nAs an example, Santiago de Compostela, the political capital city, has an average of 129 rainy days and per year (with just 17 rainy days in the three summer months) and 2,101 sunlight hours per year, with just 6 days with frosts per year. But the colder city of Lugo, to the east, has an average of 1,759 sunlight hours per year, 117 days with precipitations (> 1 mm) totalling , and 40 days with frosts per year. The more mountainous parts of the provinces of Ourense and Lugo receive significant snowfall during the winter months. The sunniest city is Pontevedra with 2,223 sunny hours per year.\n\nClimate data for some locations in Galicia (average 1971–2000):\n\nGalicia has partial self-governance, in the form of a devolved government, established on 16 March 1978 and reinforced by the Galician Statute of Autonomy, ratified on 28 April 1981. There are three branches of government: the executive branch, the Xunta de Galicia, consisting of the President and the other independently elected councillors; the legislative branch consisting of the Galician Parliament; and the judicial branch consisting of the High Court of Galicia and lower courts.\n\nThe Xunta de Galicia is a collective entity with executive and administrative power. It consists of the President, a vice president, and twelve councillors. Administrative power is largely delegated to dependent bodies. The Xunta also coordinates the activities of the provincial councils () located in A Coruña, Pontevedra, Ourense and Lugo.\n\nThe President of the Xunta directs and coordinates the actions of the Xunta. He or she is simultaneously the representative of the autonomous community and of the Spanish state in Galicia. He or she is a member of the parliament and is elected by its deputies and then formally named by the monarch of Spain.\n\nThe Galician Parliament consists of 75 deputies elected by universal adult suffrage under a system of proportional representation. The franchise includes even Galicians who reside abroad. Elections occur every four years.\n\nThe last elections, held 25 September 2016, resulted in the following distribution of seats:\n\nThere are 314 municipalities () in Galicia, each of which is run by a mayor-council government known as a .\n\nThere is a further subdivision of local government known as an ; each has its own council () and mayor (). There are nine of these in Galicia: Arcos da Condesa, Bembrive, Camposancos, Chenlo, Morgadáns, Pazos de Reis, Queimadelos, Vilasobroso and Berán.\n\nGalicia's interests are represented at national level by 25 elected deputies in the Congress of Deputies and 19 senators in the Senate - of these, 16 are elected and 3 are appointed by the Galician parliament.\n\nPrior to the 1833 territorial division of Spain Galicia was divided into seven administrative provinces:\n\n\nFrom 1833, the seven original provinces of the 15th century were consolidated into four:\n\n\nGalicia is further divided into 53 \"comarcas\", 315 municipalities (93 in A Coruña, 67 in Lugo, 92 in Ourense, 62 in Pontevedra) and 3,778 parishes. Municipalities are divided into parishes, which may be further divided into \"aldeas\" (\"hamlets\") or \"lugares\" (\"places\"). This traditional breakdown into such small areas is unusual when compared to the rest of Spain. Roughly half of the named population entities of Spain are in Galicia, which occupies only 5.8 percent of the country's area. It is estimated that Galicia has over a million named places, over 40,000 of them being communities.\n\nIn comparison to the other regions of Spain, the major economic benefit of Galicia is its fishing Industry. Galicia is a land of economic contrast. While the western coast, with its major population centers and its fishing and manufacturing industries, is prosperous and increasing in population, the rural hinterland—the provinces of Ourense and Lugo—is economically dependent on traditional agriculture, based on small landholdings called \"minifundios\". However, the rise of tourism, sustainable forestry and organic and traditional agriculture are bringing other possibilities to the Galician economy without compromising the preservation of the natural resources and the local culture.\nTraditionally, Galicia depended mainly on agriculture and fishing. Reflecting that history, the European Fisheries Control Agency, which coordinates fishing controls in European Union waters, is based in Vigo. Nonetheless, today the tertiary sector of the economy (the service sector) is the largest, with 582,000 workers out of a regional total of 1,072,000 (as of 2002).\n\nThe secondary sector (manufacturing) includes shipbuilding in Vigo and Ferrol, textiles and granite work in A Coruña. A Coruña also manufactures automobiles, but not nearly on the scale of the French automobile manufacturing in Vigo. The \"Centro de Vigo de PSA Peugeot Citroën\", founded in 1958, makes about 450,000 vehicles annually (455,430 in 2006); a Citroën C4 Picasso made in 2007 was their nine-millionth vehicle.\n\nArteixo, an industrial municipality in the A Coruña metropolitan area, is the headquarters of Inditex, the world's largest fashion retailer. Of their eight brands, Zara is the best-known; indeed, it is the best-known Spanish brand of any sort on an international basis. For 2007, Inditex had 9,435 million euros in sales for a net profit of 1,250 million euros. The company president, Amancio Ortega, is the richest person in Spain and indeed Europe with a net worth of 45 billion euros.\n\nGalicia is home to the savings bank, and to Spain's two oldest commercial banks Banco Etcheverría (the oldest) and Banco Pastor, owned since 2011 by Banco Popular Español.\n\nGalicia was late to catch the tourism boom that has swept Spain in recent decades, but the coastal regions (especially the Rías Baixas and Santiago de Compostela) are now significant tourist destinations and are especially popular with visitors from other regions in Spain, where the majority of tourists come from. In 2007, 5.7 million tourists visited Galicia, an 8% growth over the previous year, and part of a continual pattern of growth in this sector. 85% of tourists who visit Galicia visit Santiago de Compostela. Tourism constitutes 12% of Galician GDP and employs about 12% of the regional workforce.\n\nGalicia's principal airport is the Santiago de Compostela Airport. With 2,083,873 passengers in 2014, it connects to cities in Spain as well as several major European cities. There are two other commercial-aviation airports in Galicia: Vigo-Peinador Airport and A Coruña Airport.\n\nThe most important Galician fishing port is the Port of Vigo; It is one of the world's leading fishing ports, second only to Tokyo, with an annual catch worth 1,500 million euros. In 2007 the port took in of fish and seafood, and about of other cargoes. Other important ports are Ferrol, A Coruña, and the smaller ports of Marín and Vilagarcía de Arousa, as well as important recreational ports in Pontevedra and Burela. Beyond these, Galicia has 120 other organized ports.\n\nWithin Galicia are the Autopista AP-9 from Ferrol to Vigo and the Autopista AP-53 (also known as AG-53, because it was initially built by the Xunta de Galicia) from Santiago to Ourense. Additional roads under construction include Autovía A-54 from Santiago de Compostela to Lugo, and Autovía A-56 from Lugo to Ourense. The Xunta de Galicia has built roads connecting comarcal capitals, such as the aforementioned AG-53, Autovía AG-55 connecting A Coruña to Carballo or AG-41 connecting Pontevedra to Sanxenxo.\n\nThe first railway line in Galicia was inaugurated 15 September 1873. It ran from O Carril, Vilagarcía de Arousa to Cornes, Conxo, Santiago de Compostela. A second line was inaugurated in 1875, connecting A Coruña and Lugo. In 1883, Galicia was first connected by rail to the rest of Spain, by way of O Barco de Valdeorras. Galicia today has roughly of rail lines. Several lines operated by Adif and Renfe Operadora connect all the important Galician cities. A line operated by FEVE connects Ferrol to Ribadeo and Oviedo. The only electrified line is the Ponferrada-Monforte de Lemos-Ourense-Vigo line. Several high-speed rail lines are under construction. Among these are the Olmedo-Zamora-Galicia high-speed rail line that opened partly in 2011, and the AVE Atlantic Axis route, which will connect all of the major Galician Atlantic coast cities A Coruña, Santiago de Compostela, Pontevedra and Vigo to Portugal. Another projected AVE line will connect Ourense to Pontevedra and Vigo.\n\nGalicia's inhabitants are known as Galicians (, ). For well over a century Galicia has grown more slowly than the rest of Spain, due largely to a poor economy and emigration to Latin America and to other parts of Spain. Sometimes Galicia has lost population in absolute terms. In 1857, Galicia had Spain's densest population and constituted 11.5% of the national population. , only 6.1% of the Spanish population resided in the autonomous community. This is due to an exodus of Galician people since the 19th century, first to South America and later to Central Europe and to the development of population centers and industry in other parts of Spain.\n\nAccording to the 2006 census, Galicia has a fertility rate of 1.03 children per woman, compared to 1.38 nationally, and far below the figure of 2.1 that represents a stable populace. Lugo and Ourense provinces have the lowest fertility rates in Spain, 0.88 and 0.93, respectively.\n\nIn northern Galicia, the A Coruña-Ferrol metropolitan area has become increasingly dominant in terms of population. The population of the city of A Coruña in 1900 was 43,971. The population of the rest of the province, including the City and Naval Station of nearby Ferrol and Santiago de Compostela, was 653,556. A Coruña's growth occurred after the Spanish Civil War at the same speed as other major Galician cities, but since the revival of democracy after the death of Francisco Franco, A Coruña has grown at a faster rate than all the other Galician cities.\n\nThe rapid increase of population of A Coruña, Vigo and to a lesser degree other major Galician cities, like Ourense, Pontevedra or Santiago de Compostela during the years that followed the Spanish Civil War during the mid-20th century occurred as the rural population declined: many villages and hamlets of the four provinces of Galicia disappeared or nearly disappeared during the same period. Economic development and mechanization of agriculture resulted in the fields being abandoned, and most of the population moving to find jobs in the main cities. The number of people working in the Tertiary and Quaternary sectors of the economy has increased significantly.\n\nSince 1999, the absolute number of births in Galicia has been increasing. In 2006, 21,392 births were registered in Galicia, 300 more than in 2005, according to the Instituto Galego de Estatística. Since 1981, the Galician life expectancy has increased by five years, thanks to a higher quality of life.\n\n\nThe principal cities are A Coruña, Ourense, Lugo, Pontevedra, Santiago de Compostela – the political capital and archiepiscopal seat -– Vigo and Ferrol.\n\nThe largest conurbations are:\n\nLike many rural areas of Western Europe, Galicia's history has been defined by mass emigration. Significant internal migration took place from Galicia in the late 19th and early 20th centuries to the industrialized Spanish cities of Barcelona, Bilbao, Zaragoza and Madrid. Other Galicians emigrated to Latin America – Argentina, Uruguay, Venezuela, Mexico, Brazil and Cuba in particular. Fidel Castro was born in Cuba to a wealthy planter father who was an immigrant from Galicia; Castro's mother was of Galician descent.\n\nThe two cities with the greatest number of people of Galician descent outside Galicia are Buenos Aires, Argentina, and nearby Montevideo, Uruguay. Immigration from Galicia was so significant in these areas that Argentines and Uruguayans now commonly refer to all Spaniards as \"gallegos\" (Galicians).\n\nDuring the Franco years, there was a new wave of emigration out of Galicia to other European countries, most notably to France, Germany, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. Many of these immigrant or expatriate communities have their own groups or clubs, which they formed in the first decades of settling in a new place. The Galician diaspora is so widespread that websites such as Fillos de Galicia have been created in the 21st century to organize and form a network of ethnic Galicians throughout the world.\n\nThe proportion of foreign-born people in Galicia is only 2.9 percent compared to a national figure of 10 percent; among the autonomous communities, only Extremadura has a lower percentage of immigrants. Of the foreign nationals resident in Galicia, 17.93 percent are the ethnically related Portuguese, 10.93 percent are Colombian and 8.74 percent Brazilian.\n\nGalicia has two official languages: Galician (Galician: \"galego\") and Spanish (known in Spain as \"castellano\", \"Castilian\"), both of them Romance languages. Galician originated regionally; the latter was associated with Castile. Galician is recognized in the Statute of Autonomy of Galicia as the \"lingua propia\" (\"own language\") of Galicia.\n\nGalician is closely related to Portuguese. Both share a common medieval phase known as Galician-Portuguese. The independence of Portugal since the late Middle Ages has favored the divergence of the Galician and Portuguese languages as they developed.\n\nThe official Galician language has been standardized by the Real Academia Galega on the basis of literary tradition. Although there are local dialects, Galician media conform to this standard form, which is also used in primary, secondary, and university education. There are more than three million Galician speakers in the world. Galician ranks in the lower orders of the 150 most widely spoken languages on earth.\n\nFor more than four centuries of Castilian dominationi, Spanish was the only official language in Galicia. Galician faded from day-to-day use in urban areas. Since the re-establishment of democracy in Spain—in particular since passage and implementation of the \"Lei de Normalización Lingüística\" (\"Law of Linguistic Normalization\", Ley 3/1983, 15 June 1983)—the first generation of students in mass education has attended schools conducted in Galician. (Castilian Spanish is also taught.)\n\nSince the late 20th century and the establishment of Galicia's autonomy, the Galician language is resurgent. In the cities, it is generally used as a second language for most. According to a 2001 census, 99.16 percent of the population of Galicia understood the language, 91.04 percent spoke it, 68.65 percent could read it and 57.64 percent could write it. The first two numbers (understanding and speaking) were roughly the same as responses a decade earlier. But there were great gains among the percentage of the population who could read and write Galician: a decade earlier, only 49.3 percent of the population could read Galician, and 34.85 percent could write it. During the Francisco Franco era, the teaching of Galician was prohibited. Today older people may speak the language but have no written competence because of those years. Among the regional languages of Spain, Galician has the highest percentage of speakers in its population.\n\nThe earliest known document in Galician-Portuguese dates from 1228. The \"Foro do bo burgo do Castro Caldelas\" was granted by Alfonso IX of León to the town of Burgo, in Castro Caldelas, after the model of the constitutions of the town of Allariz. A distinct Galician Literature emerged during the Middle Ages: In the 13th century important contributions were made to the Romance canon in Galician-Portuguese, the most notable those by the troubadour Martín Codax, the priest Airas Nunes, King Denis of Portugal, and King Alfonso X of Castile, \"Alfonso O Sabio\" (\"Alfonso the Wise\"), the same monarch who began the process of establishing the hegemony of Castilian. During this period, Galician-Portuguese was considered the language of love poetry in the Iberian Romance linguistic culture. The names and memories of Codax and other popular cultural figures are well preserved in modern Galicia.\n\nChristianity is the most widely practised religion in Galicia. It was introduced in Late Antiquity and was practiced alongside the old Gallaeci religion for a few centuries. Today about 73% of Galicians identify as Christians. Most Christians adhere to Roman Catholicism, though only 20% of the population described themselves as active members. The Catholic Church in Galicia has had its primatial seat in Santiago de Compostela since the 12th century.\n\nSince the Middle Ages, the Galician Catholic Church has been organized into five ecclesiastical dioceses (Lugo, Ourense, Santiago de Compostela, Mondoñedo-Ferrol and Tui-Vigo). While these may have coincided with contemporary 15th-century civil provinces, they no longer have the same boundaries as the modern civil provincial divisions. The church is led by one archbishop and four bishops. The five dioceses of Galicia are divided among 163 districts and 3,792 parishes. A few are governed by administrators, the remainder by parish priests.\n\nThe patron saint of Galicia is Saint James the Greater. According to Catholic tradition, his body was discovered in 814 near Compostela. After that date, the relics of Saint James attracted an extraordinary number of pilgrims. Since the 9th century these relics have been kept in the heart of the church – the modern-day cathedral – dedicated to him. There are many other Galician and associated saints; some of the best-known are: Saint Ansurius, Saint Rudesind, Saint Mariña of Augas Santas, Saint Senorina, Trahamunda and Froilan.\n\nSince the 1960s, as immigrants have entered the region, they have brought their religions with them. In 2010 there were estimated to be 25,000 Protestants and Orthodox Christians (from eastern Europe) numbered about 10,000. There are now adherents to Islam, Buddhism and Judaism in the province. In addition, around 20% of Galicians say that they have no religion.\n\nGalicia's education system is administered by the regional government's Ministry of Education and University Administration. 76% of Galician teenagers achieve a high school degree – ranked fifth out of the 17 autonomous communities.\n\nThere are three public universities in Galicia: University of A Coruña with campuses in A Coruña and Ferrol, University of Santiago de Compostela with campuses in Santiago de Compostela and Lugo and the University of Vigo with campuses in Pontevedra, Ourense and Vigo.\n\nGalicia's public healthcare system is the (SERGAS). It is administered by the regional government's Ministry of Health.\n\nHundreds of ancient standing stone monuments like dolmens, menhirs and megalithics Tumulus were erected during the prehistoric period in Galicia, amongst the best-known are the dolmens of Dombate, Corveira, Axeitos of Pedra da Arca, menhirs like the \"Lapa de Gargñáns\". From the Iron Age, Galicia has a rich heritage based mainly on a great number of Hill forts, few of them excavated like Baroña, Sta. Tegra, San Cibrao de Lás and Formigueiros among others. With the introduction of Ancient Roman architecture there was a development of basilicas, castra, city walls, cities, villas, Roman temples, Roman roads, and the Roman bridge of Ponte Vella. It was the Romans who founded some of the first cities in Galicia like Lugo and Ourense. Perhaps the best-known examples are the Roman Walls of Lugo and the Tower of Hercules in A Coruña.\n\nDuring the Middle Ages, a huge quantity of fortified castles were built by Galician feudal nobles to mark their powers against their rivals. Although the most of them were demolished during the Irmandiño Wars (1466–1469), some Galician castles that survived are Pambre, Castro Caldelas, Sobroso, Soutomaior and Monterrei among others. Ecclesiastical architecture raised early in Galicia, and the first churches and monasteries as San Pedro de Rocas, began to be built in 5th and 6th centuries. However, the most famous medieval architecture in Galicia had been using Romanesque architecture like most of Western Europe. Some of the greatest examples of Romanesque churches in Galicia are the Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela, the Ourense Cathedral, Saint John of Caaveiro, Our Lady Mary of Cambre and the Church of San Xoán of Portomarín among others.\n\nGalician cuisine often uses fish and shellfish. The \"empanada\" is a meat or fish pie, with a bread-like base, top and crust with the meat or fish filling usually being in a tomato sauce including onions and garlic. \"Caldo galego\" is a hearty soup whose main ingredients are potatoes and a local vegetable named grelo (Broccoli rabe). The latter is also employed in \"Lacón con grelos\", a typical carnival dish, consisting of pork shoulder boiled with \"grelos\", potatoes and chorizo. \"Centolla\" is the equivalent of king crab. It is prepared by being boiled alive, having its main body opened like a shell, and then having its innards mixed vigorously. Another popular dish is octopus, boiled (traditionally in a copper pot) and served in a wooden plate, cut into small pieces and laced with olive oil, sea salt and \"pimentón\" (Spanish paprika). This dish is called \"Pulpo a la gallega\" or in Galician \"Polbo á Feira\", which roughly translates as \"Galician-style Octopus\". There are several regional varieties of cheese. The best-known one is the so-called \"tetilla\", named after its breast-like shape. Other highly regarded varieties include the San Simón cheese from Vilalba and the creamy cheese produced in the Arzúa-Ulloa area. A classical dessert is \"filloas\", crêpe-like pancakes made with flour, broth or milk, and eggs. When cooked at a pig slaughter festival, they may also contain the animal's blood. A famous almond cake called \"Tarta de Santiago\" (St. James' cake) is a Galician sweet speciality mainly produced in Santiago de Compostela and all around Galicia.\nGalicia has 30 products with \"Denominación de orixe\" (D.O.), some of them with \"Denominación de Origen Protegida\" (D.O.P.). D.O. and D.O.P. are part of a system of regulation of quality and geographical origin among Spain's finest producers. Galicia produces a number of high-quality Galician wines, including Albariño, Ribeiro, Ribeira Sacra, Monterrei and Valdeorras. The grape varieties used are local and rarely found outside Galicia and Northern Portugal. Just as notably from Galicia comes the spirit \"Augardente\"—the name means burning water—often referred to as Orujo in Spain and internationally or as caña in Galicia. This spirit is made from the distillation of the pomace of grapes.\n\n\n\n\n\nAs with many other Romance languages, Galician-Portuguese emerged as a literary language in the Middle Ages, during the 12th and 13th centuries, when a rich lyric tradition developed, followed by a minor prose tradition, whilst being the predominant language used for legal and private texts till the 15th century. However, in the face of the hegemony of Castilian Spanish, during the so-called \"Séculos Escuros\" (\"Dark Centuries\") from 1530 to the late 18th century, it fell from major literary or legal written use.\n\nAs a literary language it was revived again during the 18th and, most notably, the 19th-century (\"Rexurdimento\" \"Resurgence\") with such writers as Rosalía de Castro, Manuel Murguía, Manuel Leiras Pulpeiro, and Eduardo Pondal. In the 20th century, before the Spanish Civil War the \"Irmandades da Fala\" (\"Brotherhood of the Language\") and \"Grupo Nós\" included such writers as Vicente Risco, Ramón Cabanillas and Castelao. Public use of Galician was largely suppressed during the Franco dictatorship but has been resurgent since the restoration of democracy. Contemporary writers in Galician include Xosé Luís Méndez Ferrín, Manuel Rivas, Chus Pato, and Suso de Toro.\n\n\n\n\nIn 2015 only five \"corridas\" took place within Galicia.\nIn addition, recent studies have stated that 92% of Galicians are firmly against bullfighting, the highest rate in Spain. Despite this, popular associations, such as \"Galicia Mellor Sen Touradas\" (\"Galicia Better without Bullfights\"), have blamed politicians for having no compromise in order to abolish it and have been very critical of local councils', especially those governed by the PP and PSOE, payment of subsidies for corridas. The province government of Pontevedra stopped the end of these subsidies and declared the province \"free of bullfights\". The province government of A Coruña approved a document supporting the abolition of these events.\n\nTelevisión de Galicia (TVG) is the autonomous community's public channel, which has broadcast since 24 July 1985 and is part of the Compañía de Radio-Televisión de Galicia (CRTVG). TVG broadcasts throughout Galicia and has two international channels, Galicia Televisión Europa and Galicia Televisión América, available throughout the European Union and the Americas through Hispasat. CRTVG also broadcasts a digital terrestrial television (DTT) channel known as tvG2 and is considering adding further DTT channels, with a 24-hour news channel projected for 2010.\n\nRadio Galega (RG) is the autonomous community's public radio station and is part of CRTVG. Radio Galega began broadcasting 24 February 1985, with regular programming starting 29 March 1985. There are two regular broadcast channels: Radio Galega and Radio Galega Música. In addition, there is a DTT and internet channel, Son Galicia Radio, dedicated specifically to Galician music.\n\nGalicia has several free and community radiostations. Cuac FM is the headquarters of the Community Media Network (which brings together media non-profit oriented and serve their community). CUAC FM (A Coruña), Radio Filispim (Ferrol), Radio Roncudo (corme), Kalimera Radio (Santiago de Compostela), Radio Piratona (Vigo) and Radio Clavi (Lugo) are part of the Galician Network of Free and Association of Community Radio Broadcasters(ReGaRLiC)\n\nThe most widely distributed newspaper in Galicia is \"La Voz de Galicia\", with 12 local editions and a national edition. Other major newspapers are \"El Correo Gallego\" (Santiago de Compostela), \"Faro de Vigo\" (Vigo), \"Diario de Pontevedra\", \"El Progreso\" (Lugo), \"La Región\" (Ourense), and \"Galicia Hoxe\" – The first daily newspaper to publish exclusively in Galician. Other newspapers of note are \"Atlántico Diario\" in the Vigo city, the free \"De luns a venres\" (the first free daily in Galician), the sports paper DxT Campeón, \"El Ideal Gallego\" from A Coruña, the \"Heraldo de Vivero\", the \"Xornal de Galicia\", and the \"Diario de Ferrol\".\n\nGalicia has a long sporting tradition dating back to the early 20th century, when the majority of sports clubs in Spain were founded. The most popular and well-supported teams in the region, Celta Vigo and Deportivo La Coruña, both compete in Spain's top division, La Liga. When the two sides play, it is referred to as the Galician derby. Deportivo were champions of La Liga in 2000-2001 season.\n\nSD Compostela from Santiago de Compostela and Racing Ferrol from Ferrol are two other notable clubs and they currently play in third level, but nowadays the third most important football team of Galicia is CD Lugo, currently playing in the second division of La Liga (Liga Adelante). Similarly to Catalonia and the Basque Country, the Galician Football Federation also periodically fields a regional team against international opposition. This fact causes some political controversy because matches involving other national football teams different from the Spanish official national team threaten its status as the one and only national football team of the State. The policy of centralization in sport is very strong as it is systematically used as a patriotic device with which to build a symbol of the supposed unity of Spain which is actually a plurinational State.\n\nFootball aside, the most popular team sports in Galicia are futsal, handball and basketball. In basketball, Obradoiro CAB is the most successful team of note, and currently the only Galician team that plays in the Liga ACB; other teams are CB Breogan, Club Ourense Baloncesto and OAR Ferrol. In the sport of handball, Club Balonmán Cangas plays in the top-flight (Liga ASOBAL). The sport is particularly popular in the province of Pontevedra with the three other Galician teams in the top two divisions: SD Teucro (Pontevedra), Octavio Pilotes Posada (Vigo) and SD Chapela (Redondela).\n\nIn roller hockey HC Liceo is the most successful Galician team, in any sport, with numerous European and World titles. In futsal teams, Lobelle Santiago and Azkar Lugo.\n\nGalicia is also known for its tradition of water sports, both at sea and in rivers, sush as rowing, yachting, canoeing and surfing, in which sports is a regular winner of metals in the Olympics, currently the most notable examples are David Cal, Carlos Pérez Rial and Fernando Echavarri. In the field water sport Galician par excellence are the trainer, counting Galicia with representatives in the League of San Miguel trawlers.\n\nIn recent years comes from Galicia also become a power in any triathlon in the hands of Francisco Javier Gómez Noya and Iván Raña, both world champions, and Noia being one of the best athletes in the history of the specialty. In 2006 the cyclist Oscar Pereiro, another Galician athlete, won the Tour de France after the disqualification of American Floyd Landis, snatching him the top spot on the penultimate day. Galicians are also prominent athletes in sports such as mountaineering, where Chus Lago stands out, the third woman to reach the summit of Everest without oxygen aid, whom also has the title of Snow Leopard.\n\nSince 2011, several Gaelic football teams have been set up in Galicia. The first was Fillos de Breogán (A Coruña), followed Artabros (Oleiros), Irmandinhos (A Estrada), SDG Corvos (Pontevedra), and Suebia (Santiago de Compostela) with talk of creating a Galician league. Galicia also fielded a Gaelic football side (recognised as national by the GAA) that beat Britanny in July 2012 and was reported in the Spanish nationwide press.\n\nRugby is growing in popularity, although the success of local teams is hampered by the absence of experienced expat players from English-speaking countries typically seen at teams based on the Mediterranean coast or in the big cities. Galicia has a long established Rugby Federation that organises its own women's, children's and men's leagues. Galicia has also fielded a national side for friendly matches against other regions of Spain and against Portugal. A team of expat Galicians in Salvador, Brazil have also formed Galicia Rugby, a sister team of the local football club.\n\nA golden chalice enclosed in a field of azure has been the symbol of Galicia since the 13th century. Originated as a Canting arms due to the phonetic similarity between the words \"chalice\" and \"Galyce\" (\"Galicia\" in old Norman language), the first documented mention of this emblem is on the \"Segar's Roll\", an English medieval roll of arms where are represented all the Christian kingdoms of 13th-century Europe. In following centuries, the Galician emblem was variating; diverse shapes and number of chalices (initially three and later one or five), wouldn't be until the 16th century that its number was fixed finally as one single chalice. Centuries after, a field of crosses was slowly added to the azure background, and latterly also a silver host. Since then basically the emblem of the kingdom would be kept until nowadays.\n\nThe ancient flag of the Kingdom of Galicia was based mainly on its coat of arms until the 19th century. However, when in 1833 the Government of Spain decided to abolish the kingdom and divided it in four provinces, the Galician emblem as well as flag, lost its legal status and international validity. It wouldn't be until the late 19th century that some Galician intellectuals (nationalist politicians and writers) began to use a new flag as symbol a renewed national unity for Galicia. That flag, what was composed by a diagonal stripe over a white background, was designated \"official flag of Galicia\" in 1984, after the fall of the Franco's dictatorship. In addition, the Royal Academy of Galicia asked the Galician government to incorporate the ancient coat of arms of the kingdom onto the modern flag, being present in it since then.\n\nIn addition to its coat of arms and flag, Galicia also has an own anthem. While it is true that the Kingdom of Galicia had during centuries a kind of unofficial anthem known as the \"Solemn March of the kingdom\", the Galician current anthem was not created until 1907, although its composition had begun already in 1880. Titled \"Os Pinos\" (\"The Pines\"), the Galician anthem lyrics was written by Eduardo Pondal, one of the greatest modern Galician poets, and its music was composed by Pascual Veiga. Performed for the first time in 1907 in Havana (Cuba) by Galician emigrants, the anthem was banned since 1927 by diverse Spanish Governments until 1977, when it was officially established by the Galician authorities.\nGalicia Peak in Vinson Massif, Antarctica is named after the autonomous community of Galicia.\n\n", "id": "12837", "title": "Galicia (Spain)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12841", "text": "G protein\n\nG proteins, also known as guanine nucleotide-binding proteins, are a family of proteins that act as molecular switches inside cells, and are involved in transmitting signals from a variety of stimuli outside a cell to its interior. Their activity is regulated by factors that control their ability to bind to and hydrolyze guanosine triphosphate (GTP) to guanosine diphosphate (GDP). When they are bound to GTP, they are 'on', and, when they are bound to GDP, they are 'off'. G proteins belong to the larger group of enzymes called GTPases.\n\nThere are two classes of G proteins. The first function as monomeric small GTPases, while the second function as heterotrimeric G protein complexes. The latter class of complexes is made up of \"alpha\" (α), \"beta\" (β) and \"gamma\" (γ) subunits. In addition, the beta and gamma subunits can form a stable dimeric complex referred to as the beta-gamma complex.\n\nG proteins located within the cell are activated by G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) that span the cell membrane. Signaling molecules bind to a domain of the GPCR located outside the cell, and an intracellular GPCR domain then in turn activates a particular G protein. Some inactive-state GPCRs have also been shown to be \"pre-coupled\" with G proteins. The G protein activates a cascade of further signaling events that finally results in a change in cell function. G protein-coupled receptor and G proteins working together transmit signals from many hormones, neurotransmitters, and other signaling factors. G proteins regulate metabolic enzymes, ion channels, transporter proteins, and other parts of the cell machinery, controlling transcription, motility, contractility, and secretion, which in turn regulate diverse systemic functions such as embryonic development, learning and memory, and homeostasis.\n\nG proteins were discovered when Alfred G. Gilman and Martin Rodbell investigated stimulation of cells by adrenaline. They found that when adrenaline binds to a receptor, the receptor does not stimulate enzymes (inside the cell) directly. Instead, the receptor stimulates a G protein, which then stimulates an enzyme. An example is adenylate cyclase, which produces the second messenger cyclic AMP. For this discovery, they won the 1994 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.\n\nNobel prizes have been awarded for many aspects of signaling by G proteins and GPCRs. These include receptor antagonists, neurotransmitters, neurotransmitter reuptake, G protein-coupled receptors, G proteins, second messengers, the enzymes that trigger protein phosphorylation in response to cAMP, and consequent metabolic processes such as glycogenolysis.\n\nProminent examples include (in chronological order of awarding):\n\n\nG proteins are important signal transducing molecules in cells. \"Malfunction of GPCR [G Protein-Coupled Receptor] signaling pathways are involved in many diseases, such as diabetes, blindness, allergies, depression, cardiovascular defects, and certain forms of cancer. It is estimated that about 30% of the modern drugs' cellular targets are GPCRs.\" The human genome encodes roughly 800 G protein-coupled receptors, which detect photons of light, hormones, growth factors, drugs, and other endogenous ligands. Approximately 150 of the GPCRs found in the human genome have still-unknown functions.\n\nWhereas G proteins are activated by G protein-coupled receptors, they are inactivated by RGS proteins (for \"Regulator of G protein signalling\"). Receptors stimulate GTP binding (turning the G protein on). RGS proteins stimulate GTP hydrolysis (creating GDP, thus turning the G protein off).\n\nG protein can refer to two distinct families of proteins. Heterotrimeric G proteins, sometimes referred to as the \"large\" G proteins, are activated by G protein-coupled receptors and are made up of alpha (α), beta (β), and gamma (γ) subunits. \"\"Small\" G proteins\" (20-25kDa) belong to the Ras superfamily of small GTPases. These proteins are homologous to the alpha (α) subunit found in heterotrimers, but are in fact monomeric, consisting of only a single unit. However, like their larger relatives, they also bind GTP and GDP and are involved in signal transduction.\n\nDifferent types of heterotrimeric G proteins share a common mechanism. They are activated in response to a conformational change in the GPCR, exchanging GDP for GTP, and dissociating in order to activate other proteins in a particular signal transduction pathway. The specific mechanisms, however, differ between protein types.\n\nReceptor-activated G proteins are bound to the inner surface of the cell membrane. They consist of the G and the tightly associated G subunits. There are many classes of G subunits: Gα (G stimulatory), Gα (G inhibitory), Gα (G other), Gα, and Gα are some examples. They behave differently in the recognition of the effector molecule, but share a similar mechanism of activation.\n\nWhen a ligand activates the G protein-coupled receptor, it induces a conformational change in the receptor that allows the receptor to function as a guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) that exchanges GDP for GTP - thus turning the GPCR \"on\". The GTP (or GDP) is bound to the G subunit in the traditional view of heterotrimeric GPCR activation. This exchange triggers the dissociation of the G subunit (which is bound to GTP) from the G dimer and the receptor as a whole. However, models which suggest molecular rearrangement, reorganization, and pre-complexing of effector molecules are beginning to be accepted. Both G-GTP and G can then activate different \"signaling cascades\" (or \"second messenger pathways\") and effector proteins, while the receptor is able to activate the next G protein.\n\nThe G subunit will eventually hydrolyze the attached GTP to GDP by its inherent enzymatic activity, allowing it to re-associate with G and starting a new cycle. A group of proteins called Regulator of G protein signalling (RGSs), act as GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs), are specific for G subunits. These proteins accelerate the hydrolysis of GTP to GDP, thus terminating the transduced signal. In some cases, the effector \"itself\" may possess intrinsic GAP activity, which then can help deactivate the pathway. This is true in the case of phospholipase C-beta, which possesses GAP activity within its C-terminal region. This is an alternate form of regulation for the G subunit. However, it should be noted that such G GAPs do not have catalytic residues (specific amino acid sequences) to activate the G protein. They work instead by lowering the required activation energy for the reaction to take place.\n\nG activates the cAMP-dependent pathway by stimulating the production of cyclic AMP (cAMP) from ATP. This is accomplished by direct stimulation of the membrane-associated enzyme adenylate cyclase. cAMP can then act as a second messenger that goes on to interact with and activate protein kinase A (PKA). PKA can phosphorylate a myriad downstream targets.\n\nThe cAMP-dependent pathway is used as a signal transduction pathway for many hormones including:\n\n\nG inhibits the production of cAMP from ATP.\n\nInsulin works through G (inhibitory) second messenger proteins.\n\nG stimulates the membrane-bound phospholipase C beta, which then cleaves PIP (a minor membrane phosphoinositol) into two second messengers, IP3 and diacylglycerol (DAG).\nThe Inositol Phospholipid Dependent Pathway is used as a signal transduction pathway for many hormones including:\n\n\n\nSmall GTPases also bind GTP and GDP and are involved in signal transduction. These proteins are homologous to the alpha (α) subunit found in heterotrimers, but exist as monomers. They are small (20-kDa to 25-kDa) proteins that bind to guanosine triphosphate (GTP). This family of proteins is homologous to the Ras GTPases and is also called the Ras superfamily GTPases.\n\nIn order to associate with the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane, many G proteins and small GTPases are lipidated, that is, covalently modified with lipid extensions. They may be myristolated, palmitoylated or prenylated.\n", "id": "12841", "title": "G protein"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12848", "text": "Gary Gygax\n\nErnest Gary Gygax ( ) (July 27, 1938 – March 4, 2008) was an American game designer and author best known for co-creating with Dave Arneson the pioneering role-playing game \"Dungeons & Dragons\" (\"D&D\"). Gygax has been described as the father of \"D&D\".\n\nIn the 1960s, Gygax created an organization of wargaming clubs and founded the Gen Con gaming convention. In 1971, he helped develop \"Chainmail\", a miniatures wargame based on medieval warfare. He co-founded the company Tactical Studies Rules (TSR, Inc.) with childhood friend Don Kaye in 1973. The following year, he and Arneson created \"D&D\", which expanded on Gygax's \"Chainmail\" and included elements of the fantasy stories he loved as a child. In the same year, he founded \"The Dragon\", a magazine based around the new game. In 1977, Gygax began work on a more comprehensive version of the game, called \"Advanced Dungeons & Dragons\". Gygax designed numerous manuals for the game system, as well as several pre-packaged adventures called \"modules\" that gave a person running a \"D&D\" game (the \"Dungeon Master\") a rough script and ideas on how to run a particular gaming scenario. In 1983, he worked to license the \"D&D\" product line into the successful \"D&D\" cartoon series.\n\nAfter leaving TSR in 1985 over issues with its new majority owner, Gygax continued to create role-playing game titles independently, beginning with the multi-genre \"Dangerous Journeys\" in 1992. He designed another gaming system called \"Lejendary Adventure\", released in 1999. In 2005, Gygax was involved in the \"Castles & Crusades\" role-playing game, which was conceived as a hybrid between the third edition of \"D&D\" and the original version of the game conceived by Gygax.\n\nGygax was married twice and had six children. In 2004, Gygax suffered two strokes, narrowly avoided a subsequent heart attack, and was then diagnosed with an abdominal aortic aneurysm, from which he died in March 2008.\n\nGary Gygax was born in Chicago near Wrigley Field on July 27, 1938. He was the son of Almina Emelie (Burdick) and Swiss immigrant and Chicago Symphony Orchestra violinist Ernst Gygax. Gygax spent his early childhood in Chicago, but in 1946 he was involved in a brawl with a large group of boys, and his father decided to move the family to Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, where Gary's mother's family had settled in the early 19th century.\n\nDuring his childhood and teen years, he developed a love of games and an appreciation for fantasy and science fiction literature. When he was five, he played card games such as pinochle and then board games such as chess. At the age of ten, he and his friends played the sort of games that eventually came to be called \"live action role-playing games\" with one of them acting as a referee. His father introduced him to science fiction and fantasy through pulp novels. His interest in games, combined with an appreciation of history, eventually led Gygax to begin playing miniature war games in 1953 with his best friend Don Kaye. As teenagers Gygax and Kaye designed their own miniatures rules for toy soldiers with a large collection of and figures, where they used \"ladyfingers\" (small firecrackers) to simulate explosions.\n\nGygax dropped out of high school in his junior year and worked at odd jobs for a while, but he moved back to Chicago at age 19 to attend night classes in junior college. He also took anthropology classes at University of Chicago. The following year he married Mary Jo Powell. Their marriage produced five children: Ernest (\"Ernie\"), Lucion (\"Luke\"), Heidi, Cindy, and Elise. Gygax continued his night-school classes and made the college Dean's List. At the urging of his professors, he applied to the University of Chicago and was admitted. However, because he was married, he decided to take a full-time job in insurance instead.\n\nBy December 1958, the game Gettysburg from the Avalon Hill company had particularly captured Gygax's attention. It was also from Avalon Hill that he ordered the first blank hexagon mapping sheets that were available, which he then employed to design his own games. Gygax became active in fandom and became involved in play-by-mail Diplomacy games, for which he designed his own variants. By 1966 he was active in the wargame hobby and was writing many magazine articles on the subject. Gygax learned about H. G. Wells' \"Little Wars\" book for play of military miniatures wargames and Fletcher Pratt's \"Naval Wargame\" book. Gygax later looked for innovative ways to generate random numbers, and he used not only common, six-sided dice, but dice of all five platonic solid shapes, which he discovered in a school supply catalog.\n\nIn 1967, he and his family moved back to Lake Geneva. Except for a few months he would spend in Clinton, Wisconsin, following his divorce, and his time in Hollywood while he was the head of TSR's entertainment division, Lake Geneva would be his home for the rest of his life.\n\nDuring the 1960s, Gygax worked as an insurance underwriter for the Firemen's Fund in Chicago. In 1967, Gygax co-founded the International Federation of Wargamers (IFW) with Bill Speer and Scott Duncan. The IFW grew rapidly, especially by assimilating several pre-existing wargaming clubs, and aimed to promote interest in wargames of all periods. It provided a forum for wargamers, via its newsletters and societies, which enabled them to form local groups and share rules. In 1967, Gygax organized a 20-person gaming meet in the basement of his home; this event would later be referred to as \"Gen Con 0\". In 1968, Gygax rented Lake Geneva's vine-covered Horticultural Hall for to hold the first Lake Geneva Convention, also known as the Gen Con gaming convention for short. Gen Con is now one of North America's largest annual hobby-game gatherings. Gygax met Dave Arneson, the future co-creator of \"D&D\", at the second Gen Con in August 1969.\n\nTogether with Don Kaye, Mike Reese, and Leon Tucker, Gygax created a military miniatures society called Lake Geneva Tactical Studies Association (LGTSA) in 1970, with its first headquarters in Gygax's basement. Shortly thereafter in 1970, Robert Kuntz and Gygax founded the Castle & Crusade Society of the IFW. Late in October 1970, Gygax lost his job at the insurance company and then became a shoe repairman, which gave him more time for pursuing his interest in game development. In 1971, he began working as editor-in-chief at Guidon Games, a publisher of wargames, for which he produced the board games \"Alexander the Great\" and \"\". Early that same year, Gygax published \"Chainmail\", a miniatures wargame that simulated medieval-era tactical combat, which he had originally written with hobby-shop owner Jeff Perren. The \"Chainmail\" medieval miniatures rules were originally published in the Castle & Crusade Society's fanzine \"The Domesday Book\". Guidon Games hired Gygax to produce a \"Wargaming with Miniatures\" series of games, and a new edition of \"Chainmail\" (1971) was the first book in the series. Gygax also collaborated on Tractics (WWII to c. 1965, with Mike Reese & Leon Tucker) and with Dave Arneson on the Napoleonic naval wargame \"Don't Give Up the Ship!\"\n\nThe first edition of \"Chainmail\" included a fantasy supplement to the rules. These comprised a system for warriors, wizards, and various monsters of non-human races drawn from the works of J. R. R. Tolkien and other sources. For wizards, Gygax included six spells that could be used to affect a battle, plus two \"missiles\" (fire ball and lightning bolt). Dave Arneson adopted the \"Chainmail\" rules for his fantasy Blackmoor campaign. While visiting Lake Geneva in 1972, Arneson ran his fantasy game using the new rules, and Gygax immediately saw the potential of role-playing games.\n\nGygax and Arneson collaborated on \"The Fantasy Game\", the role-playing game which later became \"Dungeons & Dragons\", basing their work on Arneson's modified version of \"Chainmail\" for his Blackmoor campaign. Several aspects of the system governing magic in the game were inspired by The Dying Earth stories of fantasy author Jack Vance (notably the fact that \"magic-users\" in the game forget the spells that they have learned immediately upon casting them, and must re-study them in order to cast them again), and the system as a whole drew upon the work of authors such as Robert E. Howard, L. Sprague de Camp, Michael Moorcock, Roger Zelazny, Poul Anderson, Tolkien, Bram Stoker, and others. In 1972, Gygax and Arneson mailed the first 50-page copy of their \"Dungeons & Dragons\" rulebook to interested parties, which was followed by a second 150-page amateur edition of the rules that they mailed the next year. In 1973, Gygax attempted to publish the game through Avalon Hill, who turned down his offer. Gygax's \"D&D\" group had started off with himself, Ernie Gygax, Don Kaye, Rob Kuntz, and Terry Kuntz in 1972; the group had grown to a dozen players in 1973, and by 1974 it sometimes included over 20 people, with Rob Kuntz becoming the co-dungeon-master of Gygax's \"Greyhawk\" game so that each of them could referee groups of only a dozen players.\n\nGygax left Guidon Games in 1973 and, with Don Kaye as a partner, founded the publishing company Tactical Studies Rules (later known as TSR, Inc.) in October. The two men each invested in the venture—Kaye had borrowed on a life insurance policy—in order to finance the start-up of TSR. However, this did not give them enough capital to publish the rules for \"Dungeons & Dragons\", and they worried that other companies would be able to publish similar projects first. The two convinced acquaintance Brian Blume to join TSR in December 1973 as an equal one-third partner. This brought the financing that enabled them to publish \"D&D\". Gygax worked on rules for more miniatures and tabletop battle games, including \"Cavaliers and Roundheads\" (English Civil War, with Jeff Perren), \"Classic Warfare\" (Ancient Period: 1500 BC to 500 AD), and \"Warriors of Mars\".\n\n\"D&D\" appeared in 1973 at Eastercon, and pre-release copies of the game were in circulation by the end of the year. The first commercial version of \"D&D\" was released by TSR in January 1974 as a boxed set. A hand-assembled print run of 1,000 copies, put together in Gygax's home, sold out in less than a year. In the same year, Gygax created the magazine \"The Strategic Review\" with himself as editor, and then he hired Tim Kask to assist in the transition of this magazine into the fantasy periodical \"The Dragon\", with Gygax as writer, columnist, and publisher (from 1978 to 1981). \"The Dragon\" debuted in June 1976, and Gygax commented on its success years later: \"When I decided that \"The Strategic Review\" was not the right vehicle, hired Tim Kask as a magazine editor for Tactical Studies Rules, and named the new publication he was to produce \"The Dragon\", I thought we would eventually have a great periodical to serve gaming enthusiasts worldwide... At no time did I ever contemplate so great a success or so long a lifespan.\" Gygax wrote the supplements \"Greyhawk\", \"Eldritch Wizardry\", and \"Swords & Spells\" for the original \"D&D game\". With Brian Blume, Gygax also designed the wild west-oriented role-playing game \"Boot Hill\" in 1975. The \"Dungeons & Dragons Basic Set\" (released in 1977) was a variation of the original \"D&D\" geared towards younger players and edited by J. Eric Holmes.\n\nIn 1975, Gygax and Kaye were only 36 years old, and Kaye had not made any specific provision in his will regarding his one-third share of the company, when he unexpectedly died of a heart attack in January 1975. His share of TSR passed to his wife, a woman whom Gygax characterized as \"less than personable... After Don died she dumped all the Tactical Studies Rules materials off on my front porch. It would have been impossible to manage a business with her involved as a partner.\" TSR relocated from Kaye's dining room to Gygax's basement. Neither Gygax nor Blume had the money to buy the shares owned by Kaye's wife, and Blume persuaded Gygax to allow his father, Melvin Blume, to buy the shares and take Kaye's place as an equal partner. In July 1975, Gygax and Brian Blume officially formed TSR Hobbies Inc., a new company controlled by Gygax, Brian Blume, and Melvin Blume. Gygax originally held 60% ownership of this new TSR, but as part of the reorganization the new partners had to buy out Kaye's widow and pay other fees, and Gygax was unable to contribute a fair share of these costs. His ownership eventually dropped to 30% of the company, leaving him a minority stockholder. Gygax was hired on as TSR's first full-time employee in mid-1975. In 1976, TSR moved out of Gygax's house into its first professional home, known as \"The Dungeon Hobby Shop\".\n\nIn 1977, a new version of \"D&D\", \"Advanced Dungeons & Dragons\" (\"AD&D\"), was first published. The \"Monster Manual\", released later that year, became the first supplemental rule book of the new system, and many more followed. The \"AD&D\" rules were not compatible with those of \"D&D\", and as a result, \"D&D\" and \"AD&D\" became distinct product lines. Splitting the game lines created a rift between Gygax and Arneson as Gygax claimed \"AD&D\" was his own property and Arneson was due no royalties from it; in 1979, Arneson filed a lawsuit against TSR as a result, which was settled in March 1981 with the ruling that Arneson was not due compensation for the \"AD&D\" game.\n\nGygax wrote the \"AD&D\" hardcovers \"Players Handbook\", \"Dungeon Masters Guide\", \"Monster Manual,\" \"Monster Manual II\", \"Unearthed Arcana\", and \"Oriental Adventures\". Gygax also wrote or co-wrote numerous \"AD&D\" and basic \"D&D\" adventure modules, including \"The Keep on the Borderlands\", \"Tomb of Horrors\", \"Expedition to the Barrier Peaks\", \"The Temple of Elemental Evil\", \"The Forgotten Temple of Tharizdun\", \"Mordenkainen's Fantastic Adventure\", \"Isle of the Ape\", and all seven of the modules later combined into \"Queen of the Spiders\". In 1980, Gygax's long-time campaign setting of Greyhawk was published in the form of the \"World of Greyhawk Fantasy World Setting\" folio, which was expanded in 1983 into the \"World of Greyhawk Fantasy Game Setting\" boxed set. Sales of the \"D&D\" game reached in 1980. Gygax also provided assistance on the Gamma World science fantasy role-playing game in 1981 and co-authored the Gamma World adventure Legion of Gold.\n\nIn 1979, a Michigan State University student, James Dallas Egbert III, allegedly disappeared into the school's steam tunnels while playing a live-action version of \"D&D\". As a result, negative mainstream media attention focused on \"D&D\" as the cause. In 1982, Patricia Pulling's son killed himself. Blaming \"D&D\" for her son's suicide, Pulling formed an organization named B.A.D.D. (Bothered About Dungeons & Dragons) to attack the game and the company that produced it. Gygax defended the game on a segment of \"60 Minutes\", which aired in 1985. When death threats started arriving at the TSR office, Gygax hired a bodyguard. In 1982, however, TSR's annual \"D&D\" sales increased to , and in January 1983, \"The New York Times\" speculated that \"D&D\" might become \"the great game of the 1980s\" in the same manner that \"Monopoly\" was emblematic of the Great Depression.\n\nIn the early 1980s, Gygax and Mary Jo divorced, and he moved to Clinton, Wisconsin, for a short time.\n\nBrian Blume persuaded Gygax to allow his brother, Kevin Blume, to purchase the shares from their father Melvin. This gave the Blume brothers a controlling interest at TSR, Inc. By 1981, Brian Blume was increasingly unhappy with Gygax's conservative approach to the business, so using their greater stock ownership, the Blume brothers effectively took control of TSR; in 1982, Gygax was forced to step down as CEO and was replaced by Kevin Blume and then forced out to the west coast to deal with potential TV and movie opportunities. After TSR was split into TSR, Inc., and TSR Entertainment, Inc., in 1983, Gygax became the President and the Chairman of the board of directors of TSR, Inc., and the President of TSR Entertainment, Inc. As part of TSR Entertainment, Inc., which was later known as Dungeons & Dragons Entertainment Corp., Gygax went to Hollywood, where he became co-producer of the licensed \"D&D\" cartoon series for CBS. The series led its time slot for two years.\n\nOne of Gygax's creations during this time was Dragonchess, a three-dimensional fantasy chess variant, published in \"Dragon\" No. 100 (August 1985). It is played on three 8x12 boards stacked on top of each other – the top board represents the sky, the middle is the ground, and the bottom is the underworld. The pieces are characters and monsters inspired by the \"D&D\" setting: King, Mage, Paladin, Cleric, Dragon, Griffin, Oliphant, Hero, Thief, Elemental, Basilisk, Unicorn, Dwarf, Sylph, and Warrior.\n\nDuring his time in Hollywood, Gygax left the day-to-day operations of TSR to his fellow board members, Kevin and Brian Blume. In 1984, he discovered that TSR had run into serious financial difficulties. By the time he came back to Wisconsin in 1984, the company was in debt. At this point, he hired Lorraine Williams to manage the company. He engineered the removal of Kevin Blume as CEO in 1984, but the Blume brothers subsequently sold their majority shares in the company to Lorraine Williams. By this time, it was evident that Gygax and Williams had differing visions of the future of TSR, and Gygax took TSR to court in a bid to block the Blumes' sale of their shares to Williams, but he lost. In October 1985, TSR's board of directors removed Gygax as the company's President and chairman of the board. He remained on the board as a Director and made no further contributions to the company's creative efforts. Sales of \"D&D\" reached by 1985, but Gygax, seeing his future at TSR as untenable, left the company on December 31, 1985. \n\nBefore leaving TSR, Gygax had authored two novels for TSR's \"Greyhawk Adventures\" series featuring Gord the Rogue: \"Saga of Old City\" (the first Greyhawk novel) and \"Artifact of Evil\". By the terms of his settlement with TSR, Gygax kept the rights to Gord the Rogue as well as all \"D&D\" characters whose names were anagrams or plays on his own name (for example, Yrag and Zagyg). However, he lost the rights to all his other work, including the \"World of Greyhawk\" and the names of all the characters he had ever used in TSR material, such as Mordenkainen, Robilar, and Tenser. In October 1986, Gygax resigned all positions with TSR, Inc., and he settled his disputes with TSR in December 1986.\n\nImmediately after leaving TSR, Gygax helped form the company New Infinities Productions, Inc. Wargamer and accountant Forrest Baker had worked as a consultant for TSR during 1984 and 1985, and wrote up a business plan that convinced Gygax to try again with the business side of roleplaying; New Infinities was the results, with Baker as CEO and Gygax as Chairman of the Board. In October 1986, the company was publicly announced. Frank Mentzer and Kim Mohan were design executives and with Gygax formed the creative committee. Before a single product was released, Baker disappeared when his promised outside investment of one to two million dollars failed to come through. Gygax had retained the rights to Gord the Rogue as part of his severance agreement with TSR, so he licensed Greyhawk from TSR and started writing new novels beginning with \"Sea of Death\" (1987); Gygax's Gord novels were the main things keeping New Infinities in business. Gygax's first role-playing game work for New Infinities (with Mohan and Mentzer) was the science fiction-themed Cyborg Commando, which was published in 1987. Gygax announced in 1988 in a company newsletter that he and Kuntz were working on a new fantasy RPG, and that the company's \"Fantasy Master\" line would detail the Castle and City of Greyhawk as they had originally envisioned them, now called \"Castle Dunfalcon\". Gygax and Kuntz's new game would be called \"Infinite Adventures\", and was envisioned as a multigenre RPG supported by different gamebooks for different genres. However, New Infinities' investors forced the company into bankruptcy, and the company was dissolved in 1989.\n\nFrom 1986 to 1988, Gygax continued to write a few more Gord the Rogue novels, which were published by New Infinities Productions: \"Sea of Death\" (1987), \"City of Hawks\" (1987), and \"Come Endless Darkness\" (1988). However, by 1988, Gygax was not happy with the new direction in which TSR was taking \"his\" world of Greyhawk. In a literary declaration that his old world was dead, and wanting to make a clean break with all things Greyhawk, Gygax destroyed his version of Oerth in the final Gord the Rogue novel, \"Dance of Demons\". During this time, Gygax also worked with Flint Dille on the \"Sagard the Barbarian\" books, as well as \"Role-Playing Mastery\" and its sequel, \"Master of the Game\". Gygax also wrote a number of published short stories.\n\nGame Designers' Workshop saw an opportunity in the game Gygax had been developing, so they began working with him on what was called \"The Carpenter Project\" in 1992. GDW planned a multimedia blitz where Roc would do fiction publication while JVC would produce a computer game; JVC did not like the name, so they suggested calling the game \"Dangerous Dimensions\". The name was changed to \"Dangerous Journeys\" in response to a threat of a lawsuit from TSR, that the \"DD\" abbreviation would be too similar to \"D&D\". Gygax authored all of the products for \"Dangerous Journeys\", including \"Mythus\", \"Mythus Magick\", and \"Mythus Bestiary\". When the product was released by Game Designers' Workshop, TSR immediately sued for copyright infringement. The suit was eventually settled out of court, with TSR buying the complete rights to the Dangerous Journeys system from New Infinities and then permanently shelving the entire project.\n\nIn the 1990s, Gygax wrote three more novels, released under publisher Penguin/Roc and later reprinted by Paizo Publishing: \"The Anubis Murders\", \"The Samarkand Solution\", and \"Death in Delhi\". Paizo Publishing also printed \"Infernal Sorceress\", Gygax's \"lost\" novel. During 1994, he was the primary author for six issues of the entire 64-page \"Mythic Masters\" (Trigee) magazine.\n\nIn 1995, he began work on a new computer role-playing game. He called this game \"Lejendary Adventures\", and it was a game system intended to support multiple genres; when releasing the game for computers did not work out, he instead designed it as a tabletop game. Christopher Clark of Inner City Games Designs approached Gygax in 1997 to suggest that they produce some adventures to sell in game stores, as TSR had largely stopped production due to severe financial problems; the result was a pair of fantasy adventures published by Inner City Games: \"A Challenge of Arms\" (1998) and \"The Ritual of the Golden Eyes\" (1999). Gygax introduced some investors to Clark's publication setup, and although they were not willing to fund \"Legendary Adventures\", Clark put together a business plan that would allow Clark and Gygax to publish the books themselves by forming a partnership called Hekaforge Productions. Gygax was thus able to return to writing role-playing games in 1999 with \"Lejendary Adventures\". The game was published as a three-volume set: \"The Lejendary Rules for All Players\" (1999), \"Lejend Master's Lore\" (2000) and \"Beasts of Lejend\" (2000). Peter Adkison of Wizards of the Coast was able to write Gygax a cheque and clarify some issues of ownership regarding \"D&D\"; Gygax did not write any new supplements or books for TSR but he did contribute an \"Up on a Soapbox\" column from Dragon #268 (January, 2000) to Dragon #320 (June, 2004). He also contributed the preface to the 1998 adventure \"Return to the Tomb of Horrors\".\n\nGygax lent his voice to cartoons and video games in his later life, including providing the voice for his cartoon self in the episode \"Anthology of Interest I\" of the TV show \"Futurama\" which aired in 2000. Gygax also performed voiceover narration as a guest Dungeon Master in the Delera's Tomb quest series of the massively multiplayer online role-playing game \"\".\n\nGygax also worked on a number of releases with the d20 System under the Open Game License. These included the generic adventure module \"A Challenge of Arms\"; \"The Weyland Smith & Company Giant Fun Catalog\", a book of \"joke\" magic items; and \"The Slayer's Guide to Dragons\" sourcebooks.\n\nGygax offered to Stephen Chenault and Davis Chenault of Troll Lord Games to write books for Troll Lord, and on June 11, 2001 Troll Lord announced this fact. On October 9, 2001, Necromancer Games announced that they would be publishing a d20 version of \"Necropolis\", an adventure originally planned by Gygax for New Infinities Productions and later printed in 1992 as a \"Mythus\" adventure by GDW; Necromancer took a year to produce \"Gary Gygax's Necropolis\" (2002), and he did not do any more work with them. Gygax's early work for Troll Lord included a series of hardcover books that eventually came to be called \"Gygax Fantasy Worlds\", which included \"The Canting Crew\" (2002), a look at the roguish underworld, and \"World Builder\" (2003) and \"Living Fantasy\" (2003), generic game design books usable in many different settings; after the first four books in the series, Gygax dropped back to an advisorial role, though they still carried his name as part of the series logo. Troll Lord also published a few adventures as a result of their partnership with Gygax, including \"The Hermit\" (2002) an adventure intended for d20 and also for \"Lejendary Adventures\". By 2002, Gygax had given Christopher Clark an encyclopaedic 72,000-word text describing the Lejendary Earth; Clark split the manuscript up into five books and expanded it, with each of the final books coming to about 128,000 words, which gave Hekaforge a third Lejendary Adventures line, to supplement the core rules and adventures, and managed to publish the first two of those Lejendary Earth sourcebooks: \"Gazetteer\" (2002) and \"Noble Kings and Great Lands\" (2003). By 2003 Hekaforge was having financial difficulties that led Clark to ask Troll Lord Games to become an \"angel\" investor by publishing new \"Lejendary Adventures\" books. Gygax was the editor-in-chief for Troll Lord Games' series of fantasy reference books, Gygaxian Fantasy Worlds. After Gygax's stroke in 2004, he was never able to commit the same time or effort to writing that he had previously, and beginning with \"Gary Gygax's Extraordinary Book of Names\" (2004), the Gygaxian \"Fantasy Worlds\" series was only overseen by him, and after that, the line only lasted two more years, through the publication of \"Gary Gygax's Cosmos Builder\" (2006). As a result of their agreement with Hekaforge, Troll Lord was able to publish about a dozen additional \"Lejendary Adventures\" books from 2005–2008.\n\nIn 2003, Gygax announced that he was working with Rob Kuntz to publish the original and previously unpublished details of Castle Greyhawk and the City of Greyhawk in 6 volumes, although the project would use the rules for \"Castles and Crusades\" rather than \"D&D\". Since Wizards of the Coast, which had bought TSR in 1997, still owned the rights to the name \"Greyhawk\", Gygax changed the name of Castle Greyhawk to \"Castle Zagyg\", a reverse homophone of his own name. Gygax also changed the name of the nearby city to \"Yggsburgh\", a play on his initials \"E.G.G.\"\n\nThis project proved to be much more work than Gygax and Kuntz had envisioned. By the time Gygax and Kuntz had stopped working on their original home campaign, the castle dungeons had encompassed 50 levels of cunningly complex passages and thousands of rooms and traps. This, plus plans for the city of Yggsburgh and encounter areas outside the castle and city, would clearly be too much to fit into the proposed 6 volumes. Gygax decided he would compress the castle dungeons into 13 levels, the size of his original Castle Greyhawk in 1973 by amalgamating the best of what could be gleaned from binders and boxes of old notes. However, neither Gygax nor Kuntz had kept careful or comprehensive plans. Because they had often made up details of play sessions on the spot, they usually just scribbled a quick map as they played, with cursory notes about monsters, treasures, and traps. These sketchy maps contained just enough detail that the two could ensure their independent work would dovetail. All of these old notes had to be deciphered, 25-year-old memories dredged up as to what had happened in each room, and a decision made whether to keep or discard each new piece. Recreating the city too would be a challenge. Although Gygax still had his old maps of the original city, all of his previously published work on the city was owned by WotC, so he would have to create most of the city from scratch while still maintaining the \"look and feel\" of his original.\n\nEven this slow and laborious process came to a complete halt in April 2004 when Gygax suffered a serious stroke. Production came to a halt due in part to Gygax's health, so Gygax put together a team of people to continue with the creation of Zagyg background material. Although he returned to his keyboard after a seven-month convalescence, his output was reduced from 14-hour work days to only one or two hours per day. Kuntz had to withdraw due to other projects, but he continued to work on an adventure module that would be published at the same time as the first book. Under these circumstances, work on the Castle Zagyg project continued even more slowly. The Castle Zagyg line kicked off with \"CZ1: Castle Zagyg Part I: Yggsburgh\" (2005), a 256-page book. This 256-page hardcover book contained details of Gygax's original city, its personalities and politics, and over 30 encounters outside the city. Later that year, Troll Lord Games also published \"Castle Zagyg: Dark Chateau\" (2005), the adventure module written for the Yggsburgh setting by Rob Kuntz. Jeff Talanian helped with the creation of the dungeon, eventually resulting in publication of the limited edition \"CZ9: The East Marks Gazetteer\" (2007).\n\nBook catalogs published in 2005 indicated several more volumes in the series would follow shortly, but it wasn't until 2008 that the second volume, \"Castle Zagyg: The Upper Works\", appeared. Troll Lord Games revealed in 2006 that they now had the rights to Gygax's Gord the Rogue novels, to be a fourth Gary Gygax product line; the first, \"Tale of Old City\" (2008), would be one of Troll Lord's final Gygax publications. \"CZ2: The Upper Works\" (2008) was to have been the first of three massive boxes entirely detailing the dungeons beneath Castle Zagyg. \"The Upper Works\" described details of the castle above ground, acting as a teaser for the volumes concerning the actual dungeons that would follow. However, Gygax died in March 2008 before any further books were published. Three months after his death, Gygax Games – a new company formed by Gary's widow, Gail – pulled all of the Gygax licenses from Troll Lord; and also from Hekaforge. Gygax Games took over the Castle Zagyg project, where it continues to be under further development.\n\nFrom an early age, Gygax hunted and was a target-shooter with both bow and gun. He was also an avid gun collector, and at various times owned a variety of rifles, shotguns, and handguns.\n\nGygax married his first wife, Mary Jo Powell, in 1958. By 1961, they had two children who would later assist with play-testing \"D&D\". Gygax and Mary Jo had three more children before separating in March 1983. In August 1986, Gygax's sixth and last child, Alexander, was born to Gail Carpenter. Gygax married Carpenter, his second wife, on August 15, 1987, the same day as his parents' 50th wedding anniversary. By 2005, Gygax had seven grandchildren.\n\nGygax described himself as a Christian, but for much of his life had been reluctant to discuss his beliefs, citing fears that he would hurt the reputation of Christianity because of his connection to the moral panic that some people associated with \"D&D\" as a reason for not having been more vocal about his faith.\n\nGygax went into semi-retirement after suffering strokes on April 1 and May 4, 2004, and almost suffered a heart attack after receiving incorrect medication to prevent further strokes. He had been a lifelong cigarette smoker but switched to cigars after his strokes. In late 2005, he was diagnosed with an inoperable abdominal aortic aneurysm. Despite his reduced workload, Gygax continued to be active in the gaming community and regularly contributed to discussion forums on gaming websites such as Dragonsfoot and EN World.\n\nGygax died the morning of March 4, 2008, at his home in Lake Geneva at age 69.\n\nAs the \"father of role-playing games\", Gygax received many awards, honors, and tributes related to gaming:\n\n", "id": "12848", "title": "Gary Gygax"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12850", "text": "Governor of New South Wales\n\nThe Governor of New South Wales is the viceregal representative of the Australian monarch, Queen Elizabeth II, in the state of New South Wales. In an analogous way to the Governor-General of Australia at the national level, the Governors of the Australian states perform constitutional and ceremonial functions at the state level. The Governor is appointed by the queen on the advice of the Premier of New South Wales, for an unfixed period of time—known as serving \"At Her Majesty's pleasure\"—though five years is the norm. The current Governor is retired General David Hurley, who succeeded Dame Marie Bashir on 2 October 2014.\n\nThe office has its origin in the 18th-century colonial governors of New South Wales upon its settlement in 1788, and is the oldest continuous institution in Australia. The present incarnation of the position emerged with the Federation of Australia and the \"New South Wales Constitution Act 1902\", which defined the viceregal office as the Governor acting by and with the Advice of the Executive Council of New South Wales. However, the post still ultimately represented the government of the United Kingdom until, after continually decreasing involvement by the British government, the passage in 1942 of the Statute of Westminster Adoption Act 1942 (see Statute of Westminster) and the Australia Act 1986, after which the governor became the direct, personal representative of the uniquely Australian sovereign.\n\nThe office of Governor is required by the New South Wales Constitution Act, 1902. The Australian monarch, on the advice and recommendation of the Premier of New South Wales, approves the appointment of Governor with a commission issued under the royal sign-manual and Public Seal of the State, who is from then until being sworn-in by the Premier and Chief Justice referred to as the \"Governor-designate\".\n\nBesides the administration of the oaths of office, there is no set formula for the swearing-in of a governor-designate. The constitution act stipulates that: \"Before assuming office, a person appointed to be Governor shall take the Oath or Affirmation of Allegiance and the Oath or Affirmation of Office in the presence of the Chief Justice or another Judge of the Supreme Court.\" The sovereign will also hold an audience with the appointee and will at that time induct the governor-designate as a Companion of the Order of Australia (AC).\n\nThe incumbent will generally serve for at least five years, though this is only a developed convention, and the governor still technically acts at Her Majesty's pleasure (or the \"Royal Pleasure\"). The premier may therefore recommend to the Queen that the viceroy remain in her service for a longer period of time, sometimes upwards of more than seven years. A governor may also resign and three have died in office. In such a circumstance, or if the governor leaves the country for longer than one month, the Lieutenant Governor of New South Wales, concurrently held by the Chief Justice of New South Wales since 1872, serves as Administrator of the Government and exercises all powers of the governor. Furthermore, if the Lieutenant Governor becomes incapacitated while serving in the office of Governor, the next most senior judge of the Supreme Court is sworn in as the Administrator.\n\nBetween 1788 and 1957, all governors were born outside of New South Wales and were often members of the Peerage. Historian A.J.P. Taylor once noted that \"going out and governing New South Wales became the British aristocracy's 'abiding consolation'\". However, even though the implementation of the Australian Citizenship Act in 1948 established the concept of an independent Australian citizenship, the idea of Australian-born persons being appointed governor of New South Wales was much earlier. Coincidentally the first Australian-born Governor, Sir John Northcott on 1 August 1946, was also the first Australian-born Governor of any state. However, as Northcott was born in Victoria, it was not until Sir Eric Woodward's appointment by Queen Elizabeth II in 1957 that the position was filled by a New South Wales-born individual; this practice continued until 1996, when Queen Elizabeth II commissioned as her representative Gordon Samuels, a London-born immigrant to Australia.\n\nAlthough required by the tenets of constitutional monarchy to be non-partisan while in office, governors were frequently former politicians, many being members of the House of Lords by virtue of their peerage. The first Governors were all military officers and the majority of governors since have come from a military background, numbering 19. Samuels was the first governor in New South Wales history without either a political, public service or military background, being a former Justice of the Supreme Court of New South Wales. The first woman to hold this position is also the first Lebanese-Australian governor, Dame Marie Bashir.\n\nAs Australia shares its monarch equally with fifteen other countries in the Commonwealth of Nations and the sovereign lives predominantly outside New South Wales' borders, the governor's primary task is to perform the sovereign's constitutional duties on his or her behalf, acting within the principles of parliamentary democracy and responsible government as a guarantor of continuous and stable governance and as a nonpartisan safeguard against the abuse of power. For the most part, however, the powers of the Crown are exercised on a day-to-day basis by elected and appointed individuals, leaving the governor to perform the various ceremonial duties the sovereign otherwise carries out when in the country; at such a moment, the governor removes him or herself from public, though the presence of the monarch does not affect the governor's ability to perform governmental roles.\n\nIt is the governor who is required by the Constitution Act 1902, to appoint persons to the Government of New South Wales, who are all theoretically tasked with tendering to the monarch and viceroy guidance on the exercise of the Royal Prerogative. Convention dictates, that the governor must draw from the Parliament an individual to act as Premier, who is also capable of forming government—in almost all cases the Member of Parliament who commands the confidence of the Legislative Assembly. The Premier then directs the Governor to appoint other members of parliament to the Executive Council of New South Wales known as the Cabinet, and it is in practice only from this group of ministers of the Crown that the Queen and governor will take direction on the use of executive power, an arrangement called the \"Queen-in-Council\" or, more specifically, the \"Governor-in-Council\". In this capacity, the governor will issue royal proclamations and sign orders in council. The Governor-in-Council is also required to appoint in the Queen's name the President of the Legislative Council, the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, Supreme Court and District Court justices, and local court magistrates in the state, though all of these are made on the advice of either the Premier and cabinet or the majority of elected members of each house in the case of the Speaker or President. The advice given by the Cabinet is, in order to ensure the stability of government, typically binding; both the Queen and her viceroy, however, may in exceptional circumstances invoke the reserve powers, which remain the Crown's final check against a ministry's abuse of power, this was last fully exercised in 1932, when Sir Philip Game revoked the commission of Premier Jack Lang.\n\nThe Governor alone is constitutionally mandated to summon parliament. Beyond that, the viceroy carries out the other conventional parliamentary duties in the sovereign's absence, including reading the Speech from the throne and the proroguing and dissolving of parliament. The governor grants Royal Assent in the Queen's name; legally, he or she has three options: grant Royal Assent (making the bill law), withhold Royal Assent (vetoing the bill), or reserve the bill for the Queen's pleasure (allowing the sovereign to personally grant or withhold assent). If the governor withholds the Queen's assent, the sovereign may within two years disallow the bill, thereby annulling the law in question. No modern viceroy has denied Royal Assent to a bill. With most constitutional functions delegated to Cabinet, the governor acts in a primarily ceremonial fashion. He or she will host members of Australia's royal family, as well as foreign royalty and heads of state. Also as part of international relations, the governor receives letters of credence and of recall from foreign consul-generals appointed to Sydney. When they are the longest serving State Governor, the Governor of New South Wales holds a dormant commission to act as the Administrator of the Commonwealth when the Governor-General of Australia is absent from Australia, a role most recently held by Governor Bashir.\n\nThe governor is also tasked with fostering unity and pride. He or she will also induct individuals into the various national orders and present national medals and decorations, however the most senior awards such as ACs or the Victoria Cross are the sole prerogative of the Governor General. The governor also traditionally serves as Honorary and Regimental Colonel in the Royal New South Wales Regiment and as Honorary Air Commodore of No. 22 (City of Sydney) Squadron, Royal Australian Air Force. Since 1946, the governor has also always been made the Chief Scout of New South Wales.\n\nAs the personal representative of the monarch, the governor follows only the sovereign in the NSW order of precedence. The incumbent governor is entitled to use the style of \"His\" or \"Her Excellency\", while in office. On 28 November 2013 the Premier of NSW announced that the Queen had given approval for the title of \"The Honourable\" to be accorded to the governors and former governors of New South Wales. He or she also upon installation serves as a Deputy Prior of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of Saint John of Jerusalem in Australia and is also traditionally invested as either a Knight or Dame of Justice or Grace of the Order. It is also customary that the Governor is made a Companion of the Order of Australia, though this is not necessarily automatic.\n\nThe Viceregal Salute—composed of the first and last four bars of the National Anthem (\"Advance Australia Fair\")—is the salute used to greet the governor upon arrival at, and mark his or her departure from most official events, although \"God Save The Queen\", as the Royal Anthem, is also used. To mark the viceroy's presence at any building, ship, aeroplane, or car in Australia, the governor's flag is employed. The present form was adopted on 15 January 1981. The shield of the Royal Arms of New South Wales crowned with the St Edward's Crown is employed as the badge of the governor, appearing on the viceroy's flag and on other objects associated with the person or the office.\n\nAside from the Crown itself, the office of Governor of New South Wales is the oldest constitutional office in Australia. Captain Arthur Phillip assumed office as Governor of New South Wales on 7 February 1788, when the Colony of New South Wales, the first British settlement in Australia, was formally proclaimed. The early colonial governors held an almost autocratic power due to the distance from and poor communications with Great Britain, until 1824 when the New South Wales Legislative Council, Australia's first legislative body, was appointed to advise the governor.\n\nBetween 1850 and 1861, the Governor of New South Wales was titled Governor-General, in an early attempt at federalism imposed by Earl Grey. All communication between the Australian colonies and the British Government was meant to go through the Governor-General, and the other colonies had Lieutenant-Governors. As South Australia (1836), Tasmania (January 1855) and Victoria (May 1855) obtained responsible government, their Lieutenant-Governors were replaced by Governors. Although he had ceased acting as a Governor-General, Sir William Denison retained the title until his retirement in 1861.\nThe six British colonies in Australia joined together to form the Commonwealth of Australia in 1901. New South Wales and the other colonies became states in the federal system under the Constitution of Australia. In 1902, the \"New South Wales Constitution Act\" 1902 confirmed the modern system of government of New South Wales as a state, including defining the role of the Governor as the monarch's representative, who acts by and with the advice of the Executive Council. Like the new federal Governor-General and the other state governors, in the first years after federation the Governor of New South Wales continued to act both as a constitutional head of the state, and as a liaison between the government and the imperial government in London. However, the British government's involvement in Australian affairs gradually reduced in the next few years.\nIn 1942, the Commonwealth of Australia passed the \"Statute of Westminster Adoption Act 1942\", which rendered Australia dominion status under the Statute of Westminster, and while Australia and Britain share the same person as monarch, that person acts in a distinct capacity when acting as the monarch of each dominion. The convention that the monarch acts in respect of Australian affairs on the advice of his or her Australian ministers, rather than his or her British ministers, became enshrined in law. For New South Wales however, because the Statute of Westminster did not disturb the constitutional arrangements of the Australian states, the Governor remains (at least formally) in New South Wales the representative of the British monarch. This arrangement seemed incongruous with the Commonwealth of Australia's independent dominion status conferred by the Statute of Westminster, and with the federal structure. After much negotiation between the federal and state governments of Australia, the British government and Buckingham Palace, the \"Australia Act 1986\" removed any remaining constitutional roles of the British monarch and British government in the Australian states, and established that the Governor of New South Wales (along with the other state governors) was the direct, personal representative of the Australian monarch, and not the British monarch or the British government, nor the Governor-General of Australia or the Australian federal government.\n\nGovernment House, Sydney, as the residence of the monarch, is the traditional official residence of the governor. The Governor's present day office is the historic Chief Secretary’s Building nearby, at 121 Macquarie Street.\n\nOn his arrival in Sydney in 1788, Governor Phillip resided in a temporary wood and canvas house before the construction of a more substantial house on a site now bounded by Bridge Street and Phillip Street, Sydney. This first Government House was extended and repaired by the following eight Governors, but was generally in poor condition and was vacated when the Governor relocated to the new building in 1845, designed by Edward Blore and Mortimer Lewis.\n\nWith the federation of the Australian colonies in 1901, it was announced that Government House was to serve as the secondary residence of the new Governor-General of Australia. As a consequence the NSW Government leased the residence of Cranbrook, Bellevue Hill as the residence of the Governor. This arrangement lasted until 1913 when the NSW Government terminated the Commonwealth lease of Government House (the Governor-General moved to the new Sydney residence of Admiralty House), the Governor from 1913 to 1917, Sir Gerald Strickland, continued to live in Cranbrook and on his departure his successor returned to Government House.\n\nOn 16 January 1996, Premier Bob Carr announced that the next governor would be Gordon Samuels, that he would not live or work at Government House and that he would retain his appointment as chairman of the New South Wales Law Reform Commission. On these changes, Carr said: \"The Office of the Governor should be less associated with pomp and ceremony, less encumbered by anachronistic protocol, more in tune with the character of the people.\" The State's longest-serving governor, Sir Roden Cutler, was also reported as saying: \"It's a political push to make way in New South Wales to lead the push for a republic. If they decide not to have a Governor and the public agrees with that, and Parliament agrees, and the Queen agrees to it, that is a different matter, but while there is a Governor you have got to give him some respectability and credibility, because he is the host for the whole of New South Wales. For the life of me I cannot understand the logic of having a Governor who is part-time and doesn’t live at Government House. It is such a degrading of the office and of the Governor.\"\n\nIn October 2011, the new premier, Barry O'Farrell, announced that the governor, now Dame Marie Bashir, had agreed with O'Farrell's offer to move back into Government House: \"A lot of people believe the Governor should live at Government House. That's what it was built for ... [A]t some stage a rural or regional governor will be appointed and we will need to provide accommodation at Government House so it makes sense to provide appropriate living areas\". However, because Government House has not been a residence for fifteen years, O'Farrell also announced that the Governor will initially move into a smaller adjacent building, called the chalet, while refurbishments of the main wing occur, with a proposed move into the main house \"before Christmas\".\n\nIn addition to the primary Sydney vice-regal residence, many governors had also felt the need for a 'summer retreat' to escape the hard temperatures of the Sydney summers. In 1790, Governor Phillip had a secondary residence built in the township of Parramatta. In 1799 the second Governor, John Hunter, had the remains of Arthur Phillip's cottage cleared away, and a more permanent building erected on the same site. This residence remained occupied until the completion of the primary Government House in 1845, however the hard summers and growing size of Sydney convinced successive Governors of the need for a rural residence.\n\nThe governor from 1868 to 1872, The Earl Belmore, used Throsby Park in Moss Vale as his summer residence. His successor, Sir Hercules Robinson, often retired privately to the same area, in the Southern Highlands, for the same reason. In 1879 it was then decided that the colony should purchase a house at Sutton Forest for use as a permanent summer residence, and in 1881 the NSW Government purchased for £6000 a property known as \"Prospect\" that had been built by Robert Pemberton Richardson (of the firm Richardson & Wrench). This was renamed \"Hillview\", and became the primary summer governor's residence from 1885 to 1957. In 1957, seen as unnecessary and expensive, Hillview was put up for sale and purchased from the state government by Edwin Klein. Hillview was returned to the people of NSW in 1985 and is currently leased under the ownership of the Office of Environment and Heritage.\n\nThe viceregal household aids the governor in the execution of the royal constitutional and ceremonial duties and is managed by the Office of the Governor, whose current Official Secretary and Chief of Staff is Colonel Michael Miller RFD. These organised offices and support systems include aides-de-camp, press officers, financial managers, speech writers, trip organisers, event planners and protocol officers, chefs and other kitchen employees, waiters, and various cleaning staff, as well as tour guides. In this official and bureaucratic capacity, the entire household is often referred to as \"Government House\". These departments are funded through the annual budget, as is the governor's salary of A$181,555.\n\nThe following individuals have served as a Governor of New South Wales:\nCurrently, two former governors are alive. The most recent governor to die was Gordon Samuels (1996–2001), on 10 December 2007.\n\n\n", "id": "12850", "title": "Governor of New South Wales"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12851", "text": "Governor of Victoria\n\nThe Governor of Victoria is the representative in the Australian state of Victoria of its monarch, Elizabeth II, Queen of Australia and is one of the Governors of the Australian states. The governor performs the same constitutional and ceremonial functions at the state level as does the Governor-General of Australia at the federal level. The governor's office and official residence is Government House next to the Royal Botanic Gardens and surrounded by Kings Domain in Melbourne.\n\nThe Governor of Victoria is appointed by the Queen of Australia on the advice of the Premier of Victoria. The current Governor of Victoria is former judge Linda Dessau, Victoria's first female governor.\n\nIn accordance with the conventions of the Westminster system of parliamentary government, the governor nearly always acts solely on the advice of the head of the elected government, the Premier of Victoria. Nevertheless, the governor retains the reserve powers of the Crown, and has the right to dismiss the premier.\n\nThe governor of Victoria is appointed by the queen of Australia, on the advice of the premier of Victoria, to act as her representative as head of state in Victoria. The governor acts \"at the queen's pleasure\", meaning that the term of the governor can be terminated at any time by the queen acting upon the advice of the premier.\n\nSince the Australia Acts of 1986, it is the governor, and not the queen, who exercises all the powers of the head of state, and the governor is not subject to the direction or supervision of the monarch, but acts upon the advice of the premier. Upon appointment, he or she becomes a viceroy. The governor's main responsibilities fall into three categories – constitutional, ceremonial and community engagement.\n\nIn 1984, the Personal Standard of the Governor of Victoria was changed to the State Flag of Victoria, with the blue background replaced by gold, and red stars depicting the Southern Cross. Above the Southern Cross is the Royal Crown. Previously, the standard used by Victorian governors after 1870 had been the Union Jack with the Badge of the State of Victoria emblazoned in the centre. Between 1903 and 1953, the Tudor Crown was used on the State Flag and Governor's Standard, and this was changed to the present crown in 1954.\n\nThe Governor’s Standard is flown at Government House and on vehicles conveying the governor. The Standard is lowered over Government House when the governor is absent from Victoria.\n\nThere is also a lieutenant-governor and an administrator. The Chief Justice of Victoria is \"ex officio\" the Administrator, unless he or she is the lieutenant-governor, in which case, the next most senior judge is the administrator. The lieutenant-governor takes on the responsibilities of the governor when that post is vacant or when the governor is out of the state or unable to act. The administrator takes on those duties if both the governor and lieutenant-governor are not able to act for the above reasons.\n\nSee Governors of the Australian states for a description and history of the office of governor.\n\nAs with the other states, until the 1986 Australia Acts, the office of Governor of Victoria was an appointment of the British Foreign Office although local advice was considered and sometimes rejected. \n\nUntil the appointment of Victorian-born Sir Henry Winneke in 1974, the Governors of Victoria were British. Since then, governors have been Australian although several were born overseas, namely Dr Davis McCaughey, born in Ireland, came to Australia for work; and Professor David de Kretser, born in Ceylon (now Sri Lanka), and Alex Chernov, born in Lithuania, both of whom came to Australia while at school.\n\nPrior to the separation of the colony of Victoria from New South Wales in 1851, the area was called the Port Phillip District of New South Wales. The Governor of New South Wales appointed superintendents of the District. In 1839 Charles La Trobe was appointed superintendent. La Trobe became Lieutenant-Governor of Victoria on separation on 1 July 1851.\n\nBetween 1850 and 1861, the Governor of New South Wales was titled Governor-General of New South Wales, in an attempt to form a federal structure. Until Victoria obtained responsible government in 1855, the Governor-General of New South Wales appointed lieutenant-governors to Victoria. On Victoria obtaining responsible government in May 1855, the title of the then incumbent lieutenant-governor, Captain Sir Charles Hotham, became governor.\n\n, four former governors are alive, the oldest being John Landy (2001–06, born 1930). The most recent governor to die was Davis McCaughey (1986–92), on 25 March 2005. The most recently serving governor to die was Richard McGarvie (1992–1997), on 24 May 2003.\n\nThere is also a lieutenant-governor and an administrator. The Chief Justice of Victoria is \"ex officio\" the administrator, unless he or she is the lieutenant-governor, in which case, the next most senior judge is the administrator. The lieutenant-governor takes on the responsibilities of the governor when that post is vacant or when the governor is out of the state or unable to act. The administrator takes on those duties if both the governor and lieutenant-governor are not able to act for the above reasons.\n\nThe lieutenant-governor is appointed by the governor on the advice of the Premier of Victoria. Appointment as lieutenant-governor of itself confers no powers or functions. If there is no governor or if the governor is unavailable to act for a substantial period, the lieutenant-governor assumes office as administrator and exercises all the powers and functions of a governor. If expecting to be unavailable for a short period only, the governor with the consent of the premier, usually commissions the lieutenant-governor to act as deputy for the governor, performing some or all of the powers and functions of the governor.\n\nMarilyn Warren, AC, the Chief Justice of Victoria, is the current lieutenant-governor.\n\n", "id": "12851", "title": "Governor of Victoria"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12855", "text": "George Bernard Shaw\n\nGeorge Bernard Shaw (26 July 1856 – 2 November 1950), known at his insistence simply as Bernard Shaw, was an Anglo-Irish playwright, critic, and polemicist whose influence on Western theatre, culture, and politics extended from the 1880s to his death and beyond. He wrote more than sixty plays, including major works such as \"Man and Superman\" (1903), \"Pygmalion\" (1913), and \"Saint Joan\" (1923). With a range incorporating both contemporary satire and historical allegory, Shaw became the leading dramatist of his generation, and in 1925 was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature.\n\nBorn in Dublin, Shaw moved to London in 1876, where he struggled to establish himself as a writer and novelist, and embarked on a rigorous process of self-education. By the mid-1880s he had become a respected theatre and music critic. Following a political awakening, he joined the gradualist Fabian Society and became its most prominent pamphleteer. Shaw had been writing plays for years before his first public success, \"Arms and the Man\" in 1894. Influenced by Henrik Ibsen, he sought to introduce a new realism into English-language drama, using his plays as vehicles to disseminate his political, social and religious ideas. By the early twentieth century his reputation as a dramatist was secured with a series of critical and popular successes that included \"Major Barbara\", \"The Doctor's Dilemma\" and \"Caesar and Cleopatra\".\n\nShaw's expressed views were often contentious; he promoted eugenics and alphabet reform, and opposed vaccination, and organised religion. He courted unpopularity by denouncing both sides in the First World War as equally culpable, and although not a republican, castigated British policy on Ireland in the postwar period. These stances had no lasting effect on his standing or productivity as a dramatist; the inter-war years saw a series of often ambitious plays, which achieved varying degrees of popular success. In 1938 he provided the screenplay for a filmed version of \"Pygmalion\", for which he received an Academy Award. His appetite for politics and controversy remained undiminished; by the late 1920s he had largely renounced Fabian gradualism and often wrote and spoke favourably of dictatorships of the right and left—he expressed admiration for both Mussolini and Stalin. In the final decade of his life he made fewer public statements, but continued to write prolifically until shortly before his death, aged 94, having refused all state honours, including the Order of Merit in 1946.\n\nSince Shaw's death, scholarly and critical opinion has varied about his works, but he has regularly been rated as second only to William Shakespeare among English-language dramatists; analysts recognise his extensive influence on generations of playwrights. The word \"Shavian\" has entered the language as encapsulating Shaw's ideas and his means of expressing them.\n\nShaw was born at 3 Upper Synge Street in Portobello, a lower-middle-class part of Dublin. He was the youngest child and only son of George Carr Shaw (1814–1885) and Lucinda Elizabeth (Bessie) Shaw (\"née\" Gurly; 1830–1913); his elder siblings were Lucinda (Lucy) Frances (1853–1920) and Elinor Agnes (1855–1876). The Shaw family was of English descent and belonged to the dominant Protestant Ascendancy in Ireland; George Carr Shaw, an ineffectual alcoholic, was among the family's less successful members. His relatives secured him a sinecure in the civil service, from which he was pensioned off in the early 1850s; thereafter he worked irregularly as a corn merchant. In 1852 he married Bessie Gurly; in the view of Shaw's biographer Michael Holroyd she married to escape a tyrannical great-aunt. If, as Holroyd and others surmise, George's motives were mercenary, then he was disappointed, as Bessie brought him little of her family's money. She came to despise her ineffectual and often drunken husband, with whom she shared what their son later described as a life of \"shabby-genteel poverty\".\n\nBy the time of Shaw's birth his mother had become close to George John Lee, a flamboyant figure well known in Dublin's musical circles. Shaw retained a lifelong obsession that Lee might have been his biological father; there is no consensus among Shavian scholars on the likelihood of this. The young Shaw suffered no harshness from his mother, but he later recalled that her indifference and lack of affection hurt him deeply. He found solace in the music that abounded in the house. Lee was a conductor and teacher of singing; Bessie had a fine mezzo-soprano voice and was much influenced by Lee's unorthodox method of vocal production. The Shaws' house was often filled with music, with frequent gatherings of singers and players.\n\nIn 1862 Lee and the Shaws agreed to share a large house, No. 1 Hatch Street, in a better part of Dublin, and also a country cottage on Dalkey Hill, overlooking Killiney Bay. Shaw, a sensitive boy, found the less salubrious parts of Dublin shocking and distressing, and he was happier at the cottage. Lee's students often gave him books, which the young Shaw read avidly; thus, as well as gaining a thorough musical knowledge of choral and operatic works, he became familiar with a wide spectrum of literature.\n\nBetween 1865 and 1871 Shaw attended four schools, all of which he hated. His experiences as a schoolboy left him disillusioned with formal education: \"Schools and schoolmasters\", he later wrote, were \"prisons and turnkeys in which children are kept to prevent them disturbing and chaperoning their parents.\" In October 1871 he left school to become a junior clerk in a Dublin firm of land agents, where he worked hard, and quickly rose to become head cashier. During this period he was known as \"George Shaw\"; after 1876 he dropped the \"George\" and styled himself \"Bernard Shaw\".\n\nIn June 1873 Lee left Dublin for London, and never returned. A fortnight later Bessie followed him; the two girls joined her. Shaw's explanation of why his mother followed Lee was that without the latter's financial contribution the joint household had to be broken up. Left in Dublin with his father, Shaw compensated for the absence of music in the house by teaching himself to play the piano.\n\nEarly in 1876 Shaw learned from his mother that Agnes was dying of tuberculosis. He resigned from the land agents, and in March travelled to England to join his mother and Lucy at Agnes's funeral. He never again lived in Ireland, and did not visit it for twenty-nine years.\nInitially, Shaw refused to seek clerical employment in London. His mother allowed him to live free of charge in her house in South Kensington, but he nevertheless needed an income. He had abandoned a teenage ambition to become a painter, and had no thought yet of writing for a living, but Lee found a little work for him, ghost-writing a musical column printed under Lee's name in a satirical weekly, \"The Hornet\". Lee's relations with Bessie deteriorated after their move to London. Shaw maintained contact with Lee, who found him work as a rehearsal pianist and occasional singer.\n\nEventually Shaw was driven to applying for office jobs. In the interim he secured a reader's pass for the British Museum Reading Room (the forerunner of the British Library) and spent most weekdays there, reading and writing. His first attempt at drama, begun in 1878, was a blank-verse satirical piece on a religious theme. It was abandoned unfinished, as was his first try at a novel. His first completed novel, \"Immaturity\" (1879) was too grim to appeal to publishers and did not appear until the 1930s. He was employed briefly by the Edison Telephone Company in 1879–80, and as in Dublin achieved rapid promotion. Nonetheless, when the Edison firm merged with the rival Bell Telephone Company, Shaw chose not to seek a place in the new organisation. Thereafter he pursued a full-time career as an author.\n\nFor the next four years Shaw made a negligible income from writing, and was subsidised by his mother. In 1881, for the sake of economy, and increasingly as a matter of principle, he became a vegetarian. He grew a beard to hide a facial scar left by smallpox. In rapid succession he wrote two more novels: \"The Irrational Knot\" (1880) and \"Love Among the Artists\" (1881), but neither found a publisher; each was serialised a few years later in the socialist magazine \"Our Corner\".\n\nIn 1880 Shaw began attending meetings of the Zetetical Society, whose objective was to \"search for truth in all matters affecting the interests of the human race\". Here he met Sidney Webb, a junior civil servant who, like Shaw, was busy educating himself. Despite difference of style and temperament, the two quickly recognised qualities in each other and developed a lifelong friendship. Shaw later reflected: \"You knew everything that I didn't know and I knew everything you didn't know ... We had everything to learn from one another and brains enough to do it\".\n\nShaw's next attempt at drama was a one-act playlet in French, \"Un Petit Drame\", written in 1884 but not published in his lifetime. In the same year the critic William Archer suggested a collaboration, with a plot by Archer and dialogue by Shaw. The project foundered, but Shaw returned to the draft as the basis of \"Widowers' Houses\" in 1892, and the connection with Archer proved of immense value to Shaw's career.\n\nOn 5 September 1882 Shaw attended a meeting at the Memorial Hall, Farringdon, addressed by the political economist Henry George. Shaw then read George's book \"Progress and Poverty\", which awakened his interest in economics. He began attending meetings of the Social Democratic Federation (SDF), where he discovered the writings of Karl Marx, and thereafter spent much of 1883 reading \"Das Kapital\". He was not impressed by the SDF's founder, H. M. Hyndman, whom he found autocratic, ill-tempered and lacking leadership qualities. Shaw doubted the ability of the SDF to harness the working classes into an effective radical movement and did not join it—he preferred, he said, to work with his intellectual equals.\n\nAfter reading a tract, \"Why Are The Many Poor?\", issued by the recently formed Fabian Society, Shaw went to the society's next advertised meeting, on 16 May 1884. He became a member in September, and before the year's end had provided the society with its first manifesto, published as Fabian Tract No. 2. He joined the society's executive committee in January 1885, and later that year recruited Webb and also Annie Besant, a fine orator.\n\nFrom 1885 to 1889 Shaw attended the fortnightly meetings of the British Economic Association; it was, Holroyd observes, \"the closest Shaw had ever come to university education.\" This experience changed his political ideas; he moved away from Marxism and became an apostle of gradualism. When in 1886–87 the Fabians debated whether to embrace anarchism, as advocated by Charlotte Wilson, Besant and others, Shaw joined the majority in rejecting this approach. After a rally in Trafalgar Square addressed by Besant was violently broken up by the authorities on 13 November 1887 (\"Bloody Sunday\"), Shaw became convinced of the folly of attempting to challenge police power. Thereafter he largely accepted the principle of \"permeation\" as advocated by Webb: the notion whereby socialism could best be achieved by infiltration of people and ideas into existing political parties.\n\nThroughout the 1880s the Fabian Society remained small, its message of moderation frequently unheard among more strident voices. Its profile was raised in 1889 with the publication of \"Fabian Essays in Socialism\", edited by Shaw who also provided two of the essays. The second of these, \"Transition\", details the case for gradualism and permeation, asserting that \"the necessity for cautious and gradual change must be obvious to everyone\". In 1890 Shaw produced Tract No. 13, \"What Socialism Is\", a revision of an earlier tract in which Charlotte Wilson had defined socialism in anarchistic terms. In Shaw's new version, readers were assured that \"socialism can be brought about in a perfectly constitutional manner by democratic institutions\".\n\nThe mid 1880s marked a turning point in Shaw's life, both personally and professionally: he lost his virginity, had two novels published, and began a career as a critic. He had been celibate until his twenty-ninth birthday, when his shyness was overcome by Jane (Jenny) Patterson, a widow some years his senior. Their affair continued, not always smoothly, for eight years. Shaw's sex life has caused much speculation and debate among his biographers, but there is a consensus that the relationship with Patterson was one of his few non-platonic romantic liaisons.\n\nThe published novels, neither commercially successful, were his two final efforts in this genre: \"Cashel Byron's Profession\" written in 1882–83, and \"An Unsocial Socialist\", begun and finished in 1883. The latter was published as a serial in \"ToDay\" magazine in 1884, although it did not appear in book form until 1887. \"Cashel Byron\" appeared in magazine and book form in 1886.\n\nIn 1884 and 1885, through the influence of Archer, Shaw was engaged to write book and music criticism for London papers. When Archer resigned as art critic of \"The World\" in 1886 he secured the succession for Shaw. The two figures in the contemporary art world whose views Shaw most admired were William Morris and John Ruskin, and he sought to follow their precepts in his criticisms. Their emphasis on morality appealed to Shaw, who rejected the idea of art for art's sake, and insisted that all great art must be didactic.\n\nOf Shaw's various reviewing activities in the 1880s and 1890s it was as a music critic that he was best known. After serving as deputy in 1888, he became musical critic of \"The Star\" in February 1889, writing under the pen-name Corno di Bassetto. In May 1890 he moved back to \"The World\", where he wrote a weekly column as \"G.B.S.\" for more than four years. In the 2016 version of the \"Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians\", Robert Anderson writes, \"Shaw's collected writings on music stand alone in their mastery of English and compulsive readability.\" Shaw ceased to be a salaried music critic in August 1894, but published occasional articles on the subject throughout his career, his last in 1950.\n\nFrom 1895 to 1898, Shaw was the theatre critic for \"The Saturday Review\", edited by his friend Frank Harris. As at \"The World\", he used the by-line \"G.B.S.\". He campaigned against the artificial conventions and hypocrisies of the Victorian theatre and called for plays of real ideas and true characters. By this time he had embarked in earnest on a career as a playwright: \"I had rashly taken up the case; and rather than let it collapse I manufactured the evidence\".\n\nAfter using the plot of the aborted 1884 collaboration with Archer to complete \"Widowers' Houses\" (it was staged twice in London, in December 1892), Shaw continued writing plays. At first he made slow progress; \"The Philanderer\", written in 1893 but not published until 1898, had to wait until 1905 for a stage production. Similarly, \"Mrs Warren's Profession\" (1893) was written five years before publication and nine years before reaching the stage.\n\nShaw's first box-office success was \"Arms and the Man\" (1894), a mock-Ruritanian comedy satirising conventions of love, military honour and class. The press found the play overlong, and accused Shaw of mediocrity, sneering at heroism and patriotism, heartless cleverness, and copying W.S.Gilbert's style. The public took a different view, and the management of the theatre staged extra matinée performances to meet the demand. The play ran from April to July, toured the provinces and was staged in New York. Among the cast of the London production was Florence Farr, with whom Shaw had a romantic relationship between 1890 and 1894, much resented by Jenny Patterson.\n\nThe success of \"Arms and the Man\" was not immediately replicated. \"Candida\", which presented a young woman making a conventional romantic choice for unconventional reasons, received a single performance in South Shields in 1895; in 1897 a playlet about Napoleon called \"The Man of Destiny\" had a single staging at Croydon. In the 1890s Shaw's plays were better known in print than on the West End stage; his biggest success of the decade was in New York in 1897, when Richard Mansfield's production of the historical melodrama \"The Devil's Disciple\" earned the author more than £2,000 in royalties.\n\nIn January 1893, as a Fabian delegate, Shaw attended the Bradford conference which led to the foundation of the Independent Labour Party. He was sceptical about the new party, and scorned the likelihood that it could switch the allegiance of the working class from sport to politics. He persuaded the conference to adopt resolutions abolishing indirect taxation, and taxing unearned income \"to extinction\". Back in London, Shaw produced what Margaret Cole, in her Fabian history, terms a \"grand philippic\" against the minority Liberal administration that had taken power in 1892. \"To Your Tents, O Israel\" excoriated the government for ignoring social issues and concentrating solely on Irish Home Rule, a matter Shaw declared of no relevance to socialism. In 1894 the Fabian Society received a substantial bequest from a sympathiser, Henry Hunt Hutchinson—Holroyd mentions £10,000. Webb, who chaired the board of trustees appointed to supervise the legacy, proposed to use most of it to found a school of economics and politics. Shaw demurred; he thought such a venture was contrary to the specified purpose of the legacy. He was eventually persuaded to support the proposal, and the London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE) opened in the summer of 1895.\n\nBy the later 1890s Shaw's political activities lessened as he concentrated on making his name as a dramatist. In 1897 he was persuaded to fill an uncontested vacancy for a \"vestryman\" (parish councillor) in London's St Pancras district. At least initially, Shaw took to his municipal responsibilities seriously; when London government was reformed in 1899 and the St Pancras vestry became the Metropolitan Borough of St Pancras, he was elected to the newly formed borough council.\n\nIn 1898, as a result of overwork, Shaw's health broke down. He was nursed by Charlotte Payne-Townshend, a rich Anglo-Irish woman whom he had met through the Webbs. The previous year she had proposed that she and Shaw should marry. He had declined, but when she insisted on nursing him in a house in the country, Shaw, concerned that this might cause scandal, agreed to their marriage. The ceremony took place on 1 June 1898, in the register office in Covent Garden. The bride and bridegroom were both aged forty-one. In the view of the biographer and critic St John Ervine, \"their life together was entirely felicitous\". There were no children of the marriage, which it is generally believed was never consummated; whether this was wholly at Charlotte's wish, as Shaw liked to suggest, is less widely credited. In the early weeks of the marriage Shaw was much occupied writing his Marxist analysis of Wagner's \"Ring\" cycle, published as \"The Perfect Wagnerite\" late in 1898. In 1906 the Shaws found a country home in Ayot St Lawrence, Hertfordshire; they renamed the house \"Shaw's Corner\", and lived there for the rest of their lives. They retained a London flat in the Adelphi and later at Whitehall Court.\n\nDuring the first decade of the twentieth century, Shaw secured a firm reputation as a playwright. In 1904 J. E. Vedrenne and Harley Granville-Barker established a company at the Royal Court Theatre in Sloane Square, Chelsea to present modern drama. Over the next five years they staged fourteen of Shaw's plays. The first, \"John Bull's Other Island\", a comedy about an Englishman in Ireland, attracted leading politicians and was seen by Edward VII, who laughed so much that he broke his chair. The play was withheld from Dublin's Abbey Theatre, for fear of the affront it might provoke, although it was shown at the city's Royal Theatre in November 1907. Shaw later wrote that William Butler Yeats, who had requested the play, \"got rather more than he bargained for... It was uncongenial to the whole spirit of the neo-Gaelic movement, which is bent on creating a new Ireland after its own ideal, whereas my play is a very uncompromising presentment of the real old Ireland.\" Nonetheless, Shaw and Yeats were close friends; Yeats and Lady Gregory tried unsuccessfully to persuade Shaw to take up the vacant co-directorship of the Abbey Theatre after J. M. Synge's death in 1909. Shaw admired other figures in the Irish Literary Revival, including George Russell and James Joyce, and was a close friend of Seán O'Casey, who was inspired to become a playwright after reading \"John Bull's Other Island\".\n\n\"Man and Superman\", completed in 1902, was a success both at the Royal Court in 1905 and in Robert Loraine's New York production in the same year. Among the other Shaw works presented by Vedrenne and Granville-Barker were \"Major Barbara\" (1905), depicting the contrasting morality of arms manufacturers and the Salvation Army; \"The Doctor's Dilemma\" (1906), a mostly serious piece about professional ethics; and \"Caesar and Cleopatra\", Shaw's counterblast to Shakespeare's \"Antony and Cleopatra\", seen in New York in 1906 and in London the following year.\n\nNow prosperous and established, Shaw experimented with unorthodox theatrical forms described by his biographer Stanley Weintraub as \"discussion drama\" and \"serious farce\". These plays included \"Getting Married\" (premiered 1908), \"The Shewing-Up of Blanco Posnet\" (1909), \"Misalliance\" (1910), and \"Fanny's First Play\" (1911). \"Blanco Posnet\" was banned on religious grounds by the Lord Chamberlain (the official theatre censor in England), and was produced instead in Dublin; it filled the Abbey Theatre to capacity. \"Fanny's First Play\", a comedy about suffragettes, had the longest initial run of any Shaw play—622 performances.\n\n\"Androcles and the Lion\" (1912), a less heretical study of true and false religious attitudes than \"Blanco Posnet\", ran for eight weeks in September and October 1913. It was followed by one of Shaw's most successful plays, \"Pygmalion\", written in 1912 and staged in Vienna the following year, and in Berlin shortly afterwards. Shaw commented, \"It is the custom of the English press when a play of mine is produced, to inform the world that it is not a play—that it is dull, blasphemous, unpopular, and financially unsuccessful. ... Hence arose an urgent demand on the part of the managers of Vienna and Berlin that I should have my plays performed by them first.\" The British production opened in April 1914, starring Herbert Beerbohm Tree and Mrs Patrick Campbell as, respectively, a professor of phonetics and a cockney flower-girl. There had earlier been a romantic liaison between Shaw and Campbell that caused Charlotte Shaw considerable concern, but by the time of the London premiere it had ended. The play attracted capacity audiences until July, when Tree insisted on going on holiday, and the production closed. His co-star then toured with the piece in the US.\n\nIn 1899, when the Boer War began, Shaw wished the Fabians to take a neutral stance on what he deemed, like Home Rule, to be a \"non-Socialist\" issue. Others, including the future Labour prime minister Ramsay MacDonald, wanted unequivocal opposition, and resigned from the society when it followed Shaw. In the Fabians' war manifesto, \"Fabianism and the Empire\" (1900), Shaw declared that \"until the Federation of the World becomes an accomplished fact we must accept the most responsible Imperial federations available as a substitute for it\".\n\nAs the new century began, Shaw became increasingly disillusioned by the limited impact of the Fabians on national politics. Thus, although a nominated Fabian delegate, he did not attend the London conference at the Memorial Hall, Farringdon Street in February 1900, that created the Labour Representation Committee—precursor of the modern Labour Party. By 1903, when his term as borough councillor expired, he had lost his earlier enthusiasm, writing: \"After six years of Borough Councilling I am convinced that the borough councils should be abolished\". Nevertheless, in 1904 he stood in the London County Council elections. After an eccentric campaign, which Holroyd characterises as \"[making] absolutely certain of not getting in\", he was duly defeated. It was Shaw's final foray into electoral politics. Nationally, the 1906 general election produced a huge Liberal majority and an intake of 29 Labour members. Shaw viewed this outcome with scepticism; he had a low opinion of the new prime minister, Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman, and saw the Labour members as inconsequential: \"I apologise to the Universe for my connection with such a body\".\n\nIn the years after the 1906 election, Shaw felt that the Fabians needed fresh leadership, and saw this in the form of his fellow-writer H. G. Wells, who had joined the society in February 1903. Wells's ideas for reform—particularly his proposals for closer cooperation with the Independent Labour Party—placed him at odds with the society's \"Old Gang\", led by Shaw. According to Cole, Wells \"had minimal capacity for putting [his ideas] across in public meetings against Shaw's trained and practised virtuosity\". In Shaw's view, \"the Old Gang did not extinguish Mr Wells, he annihilated himself\". Wells resigned from the society in September 1908; Shaw remained a member, but left the executive in April 1911. He later wondered whether the Old Gang should have given way to Wells some years earlier: \"God only knows whether the Society had not better have done it\". Although less active—he blamed his advancing years—Shaw remained a Fabian.\n\nIn 1912 Shaw invested £1,000 for a one-fifth share in the Webbs' new publishing venture, a socialist weekly magazine called \"The New Statesman\", which appeared in April 1913. He became a founding director, publicist, and in due course a contributor, mostly anonymously. He was soon at odds with the magazine's editor, Clifford Sharp, who by 1916 was rejecting his contributions—\"the only paper in the world that refuses to print anything by me\", according to Shaw.\n\nAfter the First World War began in August 1914, Shaw produced his tract \"Common Sense About the War\", which argued that the warring nations were equally culpable. Such a view was anathema in an atmosphere of fervent patriotism, and offended many of Shaw's friends; Ervine records that \"[h]is appearance at any public function caused the instant departure of many of those present.\"\n\nDespite his errant reputation, Shaw's propagandist skills were recognised by the British authorities, and early in 1917 he was invited by Field Marshal Haig to visit the Western Front battlefields. Shaw's 10,000-word report, which emphasised the human aspects of the soldier's life, was well received, and he became less of a lone voice. In April 1917 he joined the national consensus in welcoming America's entry into the war: \"a first class moral asset to the common cause against junkerism\".\n\nThree short plays by Shaw were premiered during the war. \"The Inca of Perusalem\", written in 1915, encountered problems with the censor for burlesquing not only the enemy but the British military command; it was performed in 1916 at the Birmingham Repertory Theatre. \"O'Flaherty V.C.\", satirising the government's attitude to Irish recruits, was banned in the UK and was presented at a Royal Flying Corps base in Belgium in 1917. \"Augustus Does His Bit\", a genial farce, was granted a licence; it opened at the Royal Court in January 1917.\n\nShaw had long supported the principle of Irish Home Rule within the British Empire (which he thought should become the British Commonwealth). He did not support separatism, believing that ties with England were essential.\nIn April 1916 he wrote scathingly in \"The New York Times\" about militant Irish nationalism: \"In point of learning nothing and forgetting nothing these fellow-patriots of mine leave the Bourbons nowhere.\" Total independence, he asserted, was impractical; alliance with a bigger power (preferably England) was essential. The Dublin Easter Rising later that month took him by surprise. After its suppression by British forces, he expressed horror at the summary execution of the rebel leaders, but continued to believe in some form of Anglo-Irish union. In \"How to Settle the Irish Question\" (1917), he envisaged a federal arrangement, with national and imperial parliaments. Holroyd records that by this time the separatist party Sinn Féin was in the ascendency, and Shaw's and other moderate schemes were forgotten.\n\nIn the postwar period, Shaw despaired of the British government's coercive policies towards Ireland, and joined his fellow-writers Hilaire Belloc and G. K. Chesterton in publicly condemning these actions. The Anglo-Irish Treaty of December 1921 led to the partition of Ireland between north and south, a provision that dismayed Shaw. In 1922 civil war broke out in the south between its pro-treaty and anti-treaty factions, the former of whom had established the Irish Free State. Shaw visited Dublin in August, and met Michael Collins, then head of the Free State's Provisional Government. Shaw was much impressed by Collins, and was saddened when, three days later, he was ambushed and killed by anti-treaty forces. In a letter to Collins's sister, Shaw wrote: \"I met Michael for the first and last time on Saturday last, and am very glad I did. I rejoice in his memory, and will not be so disloyal to it as to snivel over his valiant death\". Shaw remained a British subject all his life, but took dual nationality in 1934.\n\nShaw's first major work to appear after the war was \"Heartbreak House\", written in 1916–17 and performed in 1920. It was produced on Broadway in November, and was coolly received: \"Mr Shaw on this occasion has more than usual to say and takes twice as long as usual to say it\". After the London premiere in October 1921 \"The Times\" concurred with the American critics: \"As usual with Mr Shaw, the play is about an hour too long\", although containing \"much entertainment and some profitable reflection\". Ervine in \"The Observer\" thought the play brilliant but ponderously acted, except for Edith Evans as Lady Utterword.\n\nShaw's largest-scale theatrical work was \"Back to Methuselah\", written in 1918–20 and staged in 1922. Weintraub describes it as \"Shaw's attempt to fend off 'the bottomless pit of an utterly discouraging pessimism'\". This cycle of five interrelated plays depicts evolution, and the effects of longevity, from the Garden of Eden to the year 31,920 AD. Critics found the five plays strikingly uneven in quality and invention. The original run was brief, and the work has been revived infrequently. Shaw felt he had exhausted his remaining creative powers in the huge span of this \"Metabiological Pentateuch\". He was now sixty-seven, and expected to write no more plays.\n\nThis mood was short-lived. In 1920 Joan of Arc was proclaimed a saint by Pope Benedict XV; Shaw had long found Joan an interesting historical character, and his view of her veered between \"half-witted genius\" and someone of \"exceptional sanity\". He had considered writing a play about her in 1913, and the canonisation prompted him to return to the subject. He wrote \"Saint Joan\" in the middle months of 1923, and the play was premiered on Broadway in December. It was enthusiastically received there, and at its London premiere the following March. In Weintraub's phrase, \"even the Nobel prize committee could no longer ignore Shaw after Saint Joan\". The citation for the literature prize for 1925 praised his work as \"... marked by both idealism and humanity, its stimulating satire often being infused with a singular poetic beauty\". He accepted the award, but rejected the monetary prize that went with it, on the grounds that \"My readers and my audiences provide me with more than sufficient money for my needs\".\n\nAfter \"Saint Joan\", it was five years before Shaw wrote a play. From 1924, Shaw spent four years writing what he described as his \"magnum opus\", a political treatise entitled \"The Intelligent Woman's Guide to Socialism and Capitalism\". The book was published in 1928 and sold well. At the end of the decade Shaw produced his final Fabian tract, a commentary on the League of Nations. He described the League as \"a school for the new international statesmanship as against the old Foreign Office diplomacy\", but thought that it had not yet become the \"Federation of the World\".\n\nShaw returned to the theatre with what he called \"a political extravaganza\", \"The Apple Cart\", written in late 1928. It was, in Ervine's view, unexpectedly popular, taking a conservative, monarchist, anti-democratic line that appealed to contemporary audiences. The premiere was in Warsaw in June 1928, and the first British production was two months later, at Sir Barry Jackson's inaugural Malvern Festival. The other eminent creative artist most closely associated with the festival was Sir Edward Elgar, with whom Shaw enjoyed a deep friendship and mutual regard. He described \"The Apple Cart\" to Elgar as \"a scandalous Aristophanic burlesque of democratic politics, with a brief but shocking sex interlude\".\n\nDuring the 1920s Shaw began to lose faith in the idea that society could be changed through Fabian gradualism, and became increasingly fascinated with dictatorial methods. In 1922 he had welcomed Mussolini's accession to power in Italy, observing that amid the \"indiscipline and muddle and Parliamentary deadlock\", Mussolini was \"the right kind of tyrant\". Shaw was prepared to tolerate certain dictatorial excesses; Weintraub in his ODNB biographical sketch comments that Shaw's \"flirtation with authoritarian inter-war regimes\" took a long time to fade, and Beatrice Webb thought he was \"obsessed\" about Mussolini.\n\nShaw's enthusiasm for the Soviet Union dated to the early 1920s when he had hailed Lenin as \"the one really interesting statesman in Europe\". Having turned down several chances to visit, in 1931 he joined a party led by Nancy Astor. The carefully managed trip culminated in a lengthy meeting with Stalin, whom Shaw later described as \"a Georgian gentleman\" with no malice in him. At a dinner given in his honour, Shaw told the gathering: \"I have seen all the 'terrors' and I was terribly pleased by them\". In March 1933 Shaw was a co-signatory to a letter in \"The Manchester Guardian\" protesting at the continuing misrepresentation of Soviet achievements: \"No lie is too fantastic, no slander is too stale ... for employment by the more reckless elements of the British press.\"\n\nShaw's admiration for Mussolini and Stalin demonstrated his growing belief that dictatorship was the only viable political arrangement. When the Nazi Party came to power in Germany in January 1933, Shaw described Hitler as \"a very remarkable man, a very able man\", and professed himself proud to be the only writer in England who was \"scrupulously polite and just to Hitler\". His principal admiration was for Stalin, whose regime he championed uncritically throughout the decade. Shaw saw the 1939 Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact as a triumph for Stalin who, he said, now had Hitler under his thumb.\n\nShaw's first play of the decade was \"Too True to be Good\", written in 1931 and premiered in Boston in February 1932. The reception was unenthusiastic. Brooks Atkinson of \"The New York Times\" commenting that Shaw had \"yielded to the impulse to write without having a subject\", judged the play a \"rambling and indifferently tedious conversation\". The correspondent of \"The New York Herald Tribune\" said that most of the play was \"discourse, unbelievably long lectures\" and that although the audience enjoyed the play it was bewildered by it.\n\nDuring the decade Shaw travelled widely and frequently. Most of his journeys were with Charlotte; she enjoyed voyages on ocean liners, and he found peace to write during the long spells at sea. Shaw met an enthusiastic welcome in South Africa in 1932, despite his strong remarks about the racial divisions of the country. In December 1932 the couple embarked on a round-the-world cruise. In March 1933 they arrived at San Francisco, to begin Shaw's first visit to the US. He had earlier refused to go to \"that awful country, that uncivilized place\", \"unfit to govern itself... illiberal, superstitious, crude, violent, anarchic and arbitrary\". He visited Hollywood, with which he was unimpressed, and New York, where he lectured to a capacity audience in the Metropolitan Opera House. Harried by the intrusive attentions of the press, Shaw was glad when his ship sailed from New York harbour. New Zealand, which he and Charlotte visited the following year, struck him as \"the best country I've been in\"; he urged its people to be more confident and loosen their dependence on trade with Britain. He used the weeks at sea to complete two plays—\"The Simpleton of the Unexpected Isles\" and \"The Six of Calais\"—and begin work on a third, \"The Millionairess\".\n\nDespite his contempt for Hollywood and its aesthetic values, Shaw was enthusiastic about cinema, and in the middle of the decade wrote screenplays for prospective film versions of \"Pygmalion\" and \"Saint Joan\". The latter was never made, but Shaw entrusted the rights to the former to the unknown Gabriel Pascal, who produced it at Pinewood Studios in 1938. Shaw was determined that Hollywood should have nothing to do with the film, but was powerless to prevent it from winning two Academy Awards (\"Oscars\"); he described his award for \"best-written screenplay\" as an insult, coming from such a source. He became the first person to have been awarded both a Nobel Prize and an Oscar and remained so until Bob Dylan was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature in 2016. In a 1993 study of the Oscars, Anthony Holden observes that \"Pygmalion\" was soon spoken of as having \"lifted movie-making from illiteracy to literacy\".\n\nShaw's final plays of the 1930s were \"Cymbeline Refinished\" (1936), \"Geneva\" (1936) and \"In Good King Charles's Golden Days\" (1939). The first, a fantasy reworking of Shakespeare, made little impression, but the second, a satire on European dictators, attracted more notice, much of it unfavourable. In particular, Shaw's parody of Hitler as \"Herr Battler\" was considered mild, almost sympathetic. The third play, an historical conversation piece first seen at Malvern, ran briefly in London in May 1940. James Agate commented that the play contained nothing to which even the most conservative audiences could take exception, and though it was long and lacking in dramatic action only \"witless and idle\" theatregoers would object. After their first runs none of the three plays were seen again in the West End during Shaw's lifetime.\n\nTowards the end of the decade, both Shaws began to suffer ill health. Charlotte was increasingly incapacitated by Paget's disease of bone, and he developed pernicious anaemia. His treatment, involving injections of concentrated animal liver, was successful, but this breach of his vegetarian creed distressed him and brought down condemnation from militant vegetarians.\n\nAlthough Shaw's works since \"The Apple Cart\" had been received without great enthusiasm, his earlier plays were revived in the West End throughout the Second World War, starring such actors as Edith Evans, John Gielgud, Deborah Kerr and Robert Donat. In 1944 nine Shaw plays were staged in London, including \"Arms and the Man\" with Ralph Richardson, Laurence Olivier, Sybil Thorndike and Margaret Leighton in the leading roles. Two touring companies took his plays all round the country. The revival in his popularity did not tempt Shaw to write a new play, and he concentrated on prolific journalism. A second Shaw film produced by Pascal, \"Major Barbara\" (1941) was less successful, artistically and commercially, than \"Pygmalion\", partly because of Pascal's insistence on directing, to which he was unsuited.\n\nFollowing the outbreak of war on 3 September 1939 and the rapid conquest of Poland, Shaw was accused of defeatism when, in a \"New Statesman\" article, he declared the war over and demanded a peace conference. Nevertheless, when he became convinced that a negotiated peace was impossible, he publicly urged the neutral United States to join the fight. The London blitz of 1940–41 led the Shaws, both in their mid-eighties, to live full-time at Ayot St Lawrence. Even there they were not immune from enemy air raids, and stayed on occasion with Nancy Astor at her country house, Cliveden. In 1943, the worst of the London bombing over, the Shaws moved back to Whitehall Court, where medical help for Charlotte was more easily arranged. Her condition deteriorated and she died in September.\n\nShaw's final political treatise, \"Everybody's Political What's What\", was published in 1944. Holroyd describes this as \"a rambling narrative ... that repeats ideas he had given better elsewhere and then repeats itself\". The book sold well—85,000 copies by the end of the year. After Hitler's suicide in May 1945, Shaw approved of the formal condolences offered by the Irish Taoiseach, Éamon de Valera, at the German embassy in Dublin. Shaw disapproved of the postwar trials of the defeated German leaders, as an act of self-righteousness: \"We are all potential criminals\".\n\nPascal was given a third opportunity to film Shaw's work with \"Caesar and Cleopatra\" (1945). It cost three times its original budget and was rated \"the biggest financial failure in the history of British cinema\". The film was poorly received by British critics, although American reviews were friendlier. Shaw thought its lavishness nullified the drama, and he considered the film \"a poor imitation of Cecil B. de Mille\".\nIn 1946, the year of Shaw's ninetieth birthday, he accepted the freedom of Dublin and became the first honorary freeman of the borough of St Pancras, London. In the same year the government asked Shaw informally whether he would accept the Order of Merit. He declined, believing that an author's merit could only be determined by the posthumous verdict of history. 1946 saw the publication, as \"The Crime of Imprisonment\", of the preface Shaw had written 20 years previously to a study of prison conditions. It was widely praised; a reviewer in \"The American Journal of Public Health\" considered it essential reading for any student of the American criminal justice system.\n\nShaw continued to write into his nineties. His last plays were \"Buoyant Billions\" (1947), his final full-length work; \"Farfetched Fables\" (1948) a set of six short plays revisiting several of his earlier themes such as evolution; a comic play for puppets, \"Shakes versus Shav\" (1949), a ten-minute piece in which Shakespeare and Shaw trade insults; and \"Why She Would Not\" (1950), which Shaw described as \"a little comedy\", written in one week shortly before his ninety-fourth birthday.\n\nDuring his later years, Shaw enjoyed tending the gardens at Shaw's Corner. He died at the age of ninety-four of renal failure precipitated by injuries incurred when falling while pruning a tree. He was cremated at Golders Green Crematorium on 6 November 1950. His ashes, mixed with those of Charlotte, were scattered along footpaths and around the statue of Saint Joan in their garden.\n\nShaw published a collected edition of his plays in 1934, comprising forty-two works. He wrote a further twelve in the remaining sixteen years of his life, mostly one-act pieces. Including eight earlier plays that he chose to omit from his published works, the total is sixty-two.\n\nShaw's first three full-length plays dealt with social issues. He later grouped them as \"Plays Unpleasant\". \"Widower's Houses\" (1892) concerns the landlords of slum properties, and introduces the first of Shaw's New Women—a recurring feature of later plays. \"The Philanderer\" (1893) develops the theme of the New Woman, draws on Ibsen, and has elements of Shaw's personal relationships, the character of Julia being based on Jenny Patterson. In a 2003 study Judith Evans describes \"Mrs Warren's Profession\" (1893) as \"undoubtedly the most challenging\" of the three Plays Unpleasant, taking Mrs Warren's profession—prostitute and, later, brothel-owner—as a metaphor for a prostituted society.\n\nShaw followed the first trilogy with a second, published as \"Plays Pleasant\". \"Arms and the Man\" (1894) conceals beneath a mock-Ruritanian comic romance a Fabian parable contrasting impractical idealism with pragmatic socialism. The central theme of \"Candida\" (1894) is a woman's choice between two men; the play contrasts the outlook and aspirations of a Christian Socialist and a poetic idealist. The third of the Pleasant group, \"You Never Can Tell\" (1896), portrays social mobility, and the gap between generations, particularly in how they approach social relations in general and mating in particular.\n\nThe \"Three Plays for Puritans\"—comprising \"The Devil's Disciple\" (1896), \"Caesar and Cleopatra\" (1898) and \"Captain Brassbound's Conversion\" (1899)—all centre on questions of empire and imperialism, a major topic of political discourse in the 1890s. The three are set, respectively, in 1770s America, Ancient Egypt, and 1890s Morocco. \"The Gadfly\", an adaptation of a popular novel by Ethel Voynich, was unfinished and unperformed. \"The Man of Destiny\" (1895) is a short curtain raiser about Napoleon.\n\nShaw's major plays of the first decade of the 20th century address individual social, political or ethical issues. \"Man and Superman\" (1902) stands apart from the others in both its subject and its treatment, giving Shaw's interpretation of creative evolution in a combination of drama and associated printed text. \"The Admirable Bashville\" (1901), a blank verse dramatisation of Shaw's novel \"Cashel Byron's Profession\", focuses on the imperial relationship between Britain and Africa. \"John Bull's Other Island\" (1904), comically depicting the prevailing relationship between Britain and Ireland, was popular at the time but fell out of the general repertoire in later years. \"Major Barbara\" (1905) presents ethical questions in an unconventional way, confounding expectations that in the depiction of an armaments manufacturer on the one hand and the Salvation Army on the other the moral high ground must invariably be held by the latter. \"The Doctor's Dilemma\" (1906), a play about medical ethics and moral choices in allocating scarce treatment, was described by Shaw as a tragedy. With a reputation for presenting characters who did not resemble real flesh and blood, he was challenged by Archer to present an on-stage death, and here did so, with a deathbed scene for the anti-hero.\n\n\"Getting Married\" (1908) and \"Misalliance\" (1909)—the latter seen by Judith Evans as a companion piece to the former—are both in what Shaw called his \"disquisitionary\" vein, with the emphasis on discussion of ideas rather than on dramatic events or vivid characterisation. Shaw wrote seven short plays during the decade; they are all comedies, ranging from the deliberately absurd \"Passion, Poison, and Petrifaction\" (1905) to the satirical \"Press Cuttings\" (1909).\n\nIn the decade from 1910 to the aftermath of the First World War Shaw wrote four full-length plays, the third and fourth of which are among his most frequently staged works. \"Fanny's First Play\" (1911) continues his earlier examinations of middle-class British society from a Fabian viewpoint, with additional touches of melodrama and an epilogue in which theatre critics discuss the play. \"Androcles and the Lion\" (1912), which Shaw began writing as a play for children, became a study of the nature of religion and how to put Christian precepts into practice. \"Pygmalion\" (1912) is a Shavian study of language and speech and their importance in society and in personal relationships. To correct the impression left by the original performers that the play portrayed a romantic relationship between the two main characters Shaw rewrote the ending to make it clear that the heroine will marry another, minor character. Shaw's only full-length play from the war years is \"Heartbreak House\" (1917), which in his words depicts \"cultured, leisured Europe before the war\" drifting towards disaster. Shaw named Shakespeare (\"King Lear\") and Chekhov (\"The Cherry Orchard\") as important influences on the piece, and critics have found elements drawing on Congreve (\"The Way of the World\") and Ibsen (\"The Master Builder\").\n\nThe short plays range from genial historical drama in \"The Dark Lady of the Sonnets\" and \"Great Catherine\" (1910 and 1913) to a study of polygamy in \"Overruled\"; three satirical works about the war (\"The Inca of Perusalem\", \"O'Flaherty V.C.\" and \"Augustus Does His Bit\", 1915–16); a piece that Shaw called \"utter nonsense\" (\"The Music Cure\", 1914) and a brief sketch about a \"Bolshevik empress\" (\"Annajanska\", 1917).\n\n\"Saint Joan\" (1923) drew widespread praise both for Shaw and for Sybil Thorndike, for whom he wrote the title role and who created the part in Britain. In the view of the commentator Nicholas Grene, Shaw's Joan, a \"no-nonsense mystic, Protestant and nationalist before her time\" is among the 20th century's classic leading female roles. \"The Apple Cart\" (1929), was Shaw's last popular success. He gave both that play and its successor, \"Too True to Be Good\" (1931), the subtitle \"A political extravaganza\", although the two works differ greatly in their themes; the first presents the politics of a nation (with a brief royal love-scene as an interlude) and the second, in Judith Evans's words, \"is concerned with the social mores of the individual, and is nebulous.\" Shaw's plays of the 1930s were written in the shadow of worsening national and international political events. Once again, with \"On the Rocks\" (1933) and \"The Simpleton of the Unexpected Isles\" (1934), a political comedy with a clear plot was followed by an introspective drama. The first play portrays a British prime minister considering, but finally rejecting, the establishment of a dictatorship; the second is concerned with polygamy and eugenics and ends with the Day of Judgement.\n\n\"The Millionairess\" (1934) is a farcical depiction of the commercial and social affairs of a successful businesswoman. \"Geneva\" (1936) lampoons the feebleness of the League of Nations compared with the dictators of Europe. \"In Good King Charles's Golden Days\" (1939), described by Weintraub as a warm, discursive high comedy, also depicts authoritarianism, but less satirically than \"Geneva\". As in earlier decades, the shorter plays were generally comedies, some historical and others addressing various political and social preoccupations of the author. Ervine writes of Shaw's later work that although it was still \"astonishingly vigorous and vivacious\" it showed unmistakable signs of his age. \"The best of his work in this period, however, was full of wisdom and the beauty of mind often displayed by old men who keep their wits about them.\"\n\nShaw's collected musical criticism, published in three volumes, runs to more than 2,700 pages. It covers the British musical scene from 1876 to 1950, but the core of the collection dates from his six years as music critic of \"The Star\" and \"The World\" in the late 1880s and early 1890s. In his view music criticism should be interesting to everyone rather than just the musical élite, and he wrote for the non-specialist, avoiding technical jargon—\"Mesopotamian words like 'the dominant of D major'\". He was fiercely partisan in his columns, promoting the music of Wagner and decrying that of Brahms and those British composers such as Stanford and Parry whom he saw as Brahmsian. He campaigned against the prevailing fashion for performances of Handel oratorios with huge amateur choirs and inflated orchestration, calling for \"a chorus of twenty capable artists\". He railed against opera productions unrealistically staged or sung in languages the audience did not speak.\n\nIn Shaw's view the London theatres of the 1890s presented too many revivals of old plays and not enough new work. He campaigned against \"melodrama, sentimentality, stereotypes and worn-out conventions\". As a music critic he had frequently been able to concentrate on analysing new works, but in the theatre he was often obliged to fall back on discussing how various performers tackled well-known plays. In a study of Shaw's work as a theatre critic, E. J. West writes that Shaw \"ceaselessly compared and contrasted artists in interpretation and in technique\". Shaw contributed more than 150 articles as theatre critic for \"The Saturday Review\", in which he assessed more than 212 productions. He championed Ibsen's plays when many theatregoers regarded them as outrageous, and his 1891 book \"Quintessence of Ibsenism\" remained a classic throughout the 20th century. Of contemporary dramatists writing for the West End stage he rated Oscar Wilde above the rest: \"... our only thorough playwright. He plays with everything: with wit, with philosophy, with drama, with actors and audience, with the whole theatre\". Shaw's collected criticisms were published as \"Our Theatres in the Nineties\" in 1932.\n\nShaw maintained a provocative and frequently self-contradictory attitude to Shakespeare (whose name he insisted on spelling \"Shakespear\"). Many found him difficult to take seriously on the subject; Duff Cooper observed that by attacking Shakespeare, \"it is Shaw who appears a ridiculous pigmy shaking his fist at a mountain.\" Shaw was, nevertheless, a knowledgeable Shakespearian, and in an article in which he wrote, \"With the single exception of Homer, there is no eminent writer, not even Sir Walter Scott, whom I can despise so entirely as I despise Shakespear when I measure my mind against his,\" he also said, \"But I am bound to add that I pity the man who cannot enjoy Shakespear. He has outlasted thousands of abler thinkers, and will outlast a thousand more\". Shaw had two regular targets for his more extreme comments about Shakespeare: undiscriminating \"Bardolaters\", and actors and directors who presented insensitively cut texts in over-elaborate productions. He was continually drawn back to Shakespeare, and wrote three plays with Shakespearean themes: \"The Dark Lady of the Sonnets\", \"Cymbeline Refinished\" and \"Shakes versus Shav\". In a 2001 analysis of Shaw's Shakespearian criticisms, Robert Pierce concludes that Shaw, who was no academic, saw Shakespeare's plays—like all theatre—from an author's practical point of view: \"Shaw helps us to get away from the Romantics' picture of Shakespeare as a titanic genius, one whose art cannot be analyzed or connected with the mundane considerations of theatrical conditions and profit and loss, or with a specific staging and cast of actors.\"\n\nShaw's political and social commentaries were published variously in Fabian tracts, in essays, in two full-length books, in innumerable newspaper and journal articles and in prefaces to his plays. The majority of Shaw's Fabian tracts were published anonymously, representing the voice of the society rather than of Shaw, although the society's secretary Edward Pease later confirmed Shaw's authorship. According to Holroyd, the business of the early Fabians, mainly under the influence of Shaw, was to \"alter history by rewriting it\". Shaw's talent as a pamphleteer was put to immediate use in the production of the society's manifesto—after which, says Holroyd, he was never again so succinct.\nAfter the turn of the 20th century, Shaw increasingly propagated his ideas through the medium of his plays. An early critic, writing in 1904, observed that Shaw's dramas provided \"a pleasant means\" of proselytising his socialism, adding that \"Mr Shaw's views are to be sought especially in the prefaces to his plays\". After loosening his ties with the Fabian movement in 1911, Shaw's writings were more personal and often provocative; his response to the furore following the issue of \"Common Sense About the War\" in 1914, was to prepare a sequel, \"More Common Sense About the War\". In this, he denounced the pacifist line espoused by Ramsay MacDonald and other socialist leaders, and proclaimed his readiness to shoot all pacifists rather than cede them power and influence. On the advice of Beatrice Webb, this pamphlet remained unpublished.\n\n\"The Intelligent Woman's Guide\", Shaw's main political treatise of the 1920s, attracted both admiration and criticism. MacDonald considered it the world's most important book since the Bible; Harold Laski thought its arguments outdated and lacking in concern for individual freedoms. Shaw's increasing flirtation with dictatorial methods is evident in many of his subsequent pronouncements. A \"New York Times\" report dated 10 December 1933 quoted a recent Fabian Society lecture in which Shaw had praised Hitler, Mussolini and Stalin: \"[T]hey are trying to get something done, [and] are adopting methods by which it is possible to get something done\". As late as the Second World War, in \"Everybody's Political What's What\", Shaw blamed the Allies' \"abuse\" of their 1918 victory for the rise of Hitler, and hoped that, after defeat, the Führer would escape retribution \"to enjoy a comfortable retirement in Ireland or some other neutral country\". These sentiments, according to the Irish philosopher-poet Thomas Duddy, \"rendered much of the Shavian outlook passé and contemptible\".\n\n\"Creative evolution\", Shaw's version of the new science of eugenics, became an increasing theme in his political writing after 1900. He introduced his theories in \"The Revolutionist's Handbook\" (1903), an appendix to \"Man and Superman\", and developed them further during the 1920s in \"Back to Methuselah\". A 1946 \"Life\" magazine article observed that Shaw had \"always tended to look at people more as a biologist than as an artist\". By 1933, in the preface to \"On the Rocks\", he was writing that \"if we desire a certain type of civilization and culture we must exterminate the sort of people who do not fit into it\"; critical opinion is divided on whether this was intended as irony. In an article in the American magazine \"Liberty\", in September 1938, Shaw included the statement: \"There are many people in the world who ought to be liquidated\". Many commentators assumed that such comments were intended as a joke, although in the worst possible taste. Otherwise, \"Life\" magazine concluded, \"this silliness can be classed with his more innocent bad guesses\".\n\nShaw's fiction-writing was largely confined to the five unsuccessful novels written in the period 1879–1885. \"Immaturity\" (1879) is a semi-autobiographical portrayal of mid-Victorian England, Shaw's \"own \"David Copperfield\"\" according to Weintraub. \"The Irrational Knot\" (1880) is a critique of conventional marriage, in which Weintraub finds the characterisations lifeless, \"hardly more than animated theories\". Shaw was pleased with his third novel, \"Love Among the Artists\" (1881), feeling that it marked a turning point in his development as a thinker, although he had no more success with it than with its predecessors. \"Cashel Byron's Profession\" (1882) is, says Weintraub, an indictment of society which anticipates Shaw's first full-length play, \"Mrs Warren's Profession\". Shaw later explained that he had intended \"An Unsocial Socialist\" as the first section of a monumental depiction of the downfall of capitalism. Gareth Griffith, in a study of Shaw's political thought, sees the novel as an interesting record of conditions, both in society at large and in the nascent socialist movement of the 1880s.\n\nShaw's only subsequent fiction of any substance was his 1932 novella \"The Adventures of the Black Girl in Her Search for God\", written during a visit to South Africa in 1932. The eponymous girl, intelligent, inquisitive, and converted to Christianity by insubstantial missionary teaching, sets out to find God, on a journey that after many adventures and encounters, leads her to a secular conclusion. The story, on publication, offended some Christians and was banned in Ireland by the Board of Censors.\n\nShaw was a prolific correspondent throughout his life. His letters, edited by Dan H. Laurence, were published between 1965 and 1988. Shaw once estimated his letters would occupy twenty volumes; Laurence commented that, unedited, they would fill many more. Shaw wrote more than a quarter of a million letters, of which about ten per cent have survived; 2,653 letters are printed in Laurence's four volumes. Among Shaw's many regular correspondents were his childhood friend Edward McNulty; his theatrical colleagues (and \"amitiés amoureuses\") Mrs Patrick Campbell and Ellen Terry; writers including Lord Alfred Douglas, H. G. Wells and G. K. Chesterton; the boxer Gene Tunney; the nun Laurentia McLachlan; and the art expert Sydney Cockerell. In 2007 a 316-page volume consisting entirely of Shaw's letters to \"The Times\" was published.\n\nShaw's diaries for 1885–97, edited by Weintraub, were published in two volumes, with a total of 1,241 pages, in 1986. Reviewing them, the Shaw scholar Fred Crawford wrote: \"Although the primary interest for Shavians is the material that supplements what we already know about Shaw's life and work, the diaries are also valuable as a historical and sociological document of English life at the end of the Victorian age.\" After 1897 pressure of other writing led Shaw to give up keeping a diary.\n\nThrough his journalism, pamphlets and occasional longer works, Shaw wrote on many subjects. His range of interest and enquiry included vivisection, vegetarianism, religion, language, cinema and photography, on all of which he wrote and spoke copiously. Collections of his writings on these and other subjects were published, mainly after his death, together with volumes of selected aphorisms, \"wit and wisdom\" and general journalism.\n\nDespite the many books written about him (Holroyd counts 80 by 1939) Shaw's autobiographical output, apart from his diaries, was relatively slight. He gave interviews to newspapers—\"GBS Confesses\", to \"The Daily Mail\" in 1904 is an example—and provided sketches to would-be biographers whose work was rejected by Shaw and never published. In 1939 Shaw drew on these materials to produce \"Shaw Gives Himself Away\", a miscellany which, a year before his death, he revised and republished as \"Sixteen Self Sketches\" (there were seventeen). He made it clear to his publishers that this slim book was in no sense a full autobiography.\n\nIn his lifetime Shaw professed many beliefs, often contradictory. This inconsistency was partly an intentional provocation—the Spanish scholar-statesman Salvador de Madariaga describes Shaw as \"a pole of negative electricity set in a people of positive electricity\". In one area at least Shaw was constant: in his lifelong refusal to follow normal English forms of spelling and punctuation. He favoured archaic spellings such as \"shew\" for \"show\"; he dropped the \"u\" in words like \"honour\" and \"favour\"; and wherever possible he rejected the apostrophe in contractions such as \"won't\" or \"that's\". In his will, Shaw ordered that, after some specified legacies, his remaining assets were to form a trust to pay for fundamental reform of the English alphabet into a phonetic version of forty letters. Though Shaw's intentions were clear, his drafting was flawed, and the courts initially ruled the intended trust void. A later out-of-court agreement provided a sum of £8,300 for spelling reform; the bulk of his fortune went to the residuary legatees—the British Museum, the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art and the National Gallery of Ireland. Most of the £8,300 went on a special phonetic edition of \"Androcles and the Lion\", published in 1962 to a largely indifferent reception.\n\nLess consistently maintained were Shaw's views on religion and Christianity. Having in his youth proclaimed himself an atheist, in middle age he explained this as a reaction against the Old Testament image of a vengeful Jehovah. By the early 20th century, he termed himself a \"mystic\", although Gary Sloan, in an essay on Shaw's beliefs, disputes his credentials as such. In 1913 Shaw declared that he was not religious \"in the sectarian sense\", aligning himself with Jesus as \"a person of no religion\". In the preface (1915) to \"Androcles and the Lion\", Shaw asks \"Why not give Christianity a chance\"? contending that Britain's social order resulted from the continuing choice of Barabbas over Christ. In a broadcast just before the Second World War, Shaw invoked the Sermon on the Mount, \"a very moving exhortation, and it gives you one first-rate tip, which is to do good to those who despitefully use you and persecute you\". In his will, Shaw stated that his \"religious convictions and scientific views cannot at present be more specifically defined than as those of a believer in creative revolution.\" He requested that no one should imply that he accepted the beliefs of any specific religious organisation, and that no memorial to him should \"take the form of a cross or any other instrument of torture or symbol of blood sacrifice.\"\n\nShaw espoused racial equality, and inter-marriage between people of different races. Despite his expressed wish to be fair to Hitler, he called anti-Semitism \"the hatred of the lazy, ignorant fat-headed Gentile for the pertinacious Jew who, schooled by adversity to use his brains to the utmost, outdoes him in business\". In \"The Jewish Chronicle\" he wrote in 1932, \"In every country you can find rabid people who have a phobia against Jews, Jesuits, Armenians, Negroes, Freemasons, Irishmen, or simply foreigners as such. Political parties are not above exploiting these fears and jealousies.\"\n\nIn 1903 Shaw joined in a controversy about vaccination against smallpox. He called vaccination \"a peculiarly filthy piece of witchcraft\"; in his view immunisation campaigns were a cheap and inadequate substitute for a decent programme of housing for the poor, which would, he declared, be the means of eradicating smallpox and other infectious diseases. Less contentiously, Shaw was keenly interested in transport; Laurence observed in 1992 a need for a published study of Shaw's interest in \"bicycling, motorbikes, automobiles, and planes, climaxing in his joining the Interplanetary Society in his nineties.\" Shaw published articles on travel, took photographs of his journeys, and submitted notes to the Royal Automobile Club.\n\nShaw strove throughout his adult life to be referred to as \"Bernard Shaw\" rather than \"George Bernard Shaw\", but confused matters by continuing to use his full initials—G.B.S.—as a by-line, and often signed himself \"G.Bernard Shaw\". He left instructions in his will that his executor (the Public Trustee) was to license publication of his works only under the name Bernard Shaw. Shaw scholars including Ervine, Judith Evans, Holroyd, Laurence and Weintraub, and many publishers have respected Shaw's preference, although the Cambridge University Press was among the exceptions with its 1988 \"Cambridge Companion to George Bernard Shaw\".\n\nShaw did not found a school of dramatists as such, but Crawford asserts that today \"we recognise [him] as second only to Shakespeare in the British theatrical tradition ... the proponent of the theater of ideas\" who struck a death-blow to 19th-century melodrama. According to Laurence, Shaw pioneered \"intelligent\" theatre, in which the audience was required to think, thereby paving the way for the new breeds of 20th-century playwrights from Galsworthy to Pinter.\n\nCrawford lists numerous playwrights whose work owes something to that of Shaw. Among those active in Shaw's lifetime he includes Noël Coward, who based his early comedy \"The Young Idea\" on \"You Never Can Tell\" and continued to draw on the older man's works in later plays. T. S. Eliot, by no means an admirer of Shaw, admitted that the epilogue of \"Murder in the Cathedral\", in which Becket's slayers explain their actions to the audience, might have been influenced by \"Saint Joan\". The critic Eric Bentley comments that Eliot's later play \"The Confidential Clerk\" \"had all the earmarks of Shavianism ... without the merits of the real Bernard Shaw\". Among more recent British dramatists, Crawford marks Tom Stoppard as \"the most Shavian of contemporary playwrights\"; Shaw's \"serious farce\" is continued in the works of Stoppard's contemporaries Alan Ayckbourn, Henry Livings and Peter Nichols.\n\nShaw's influence crossed the Atlantic at an early stage. Bernard Dukore notes that he was successful as a dramatist in America ten years before achieving comparable success in Britain. Among many American writers professing a direct debt to Shaw, Eugene O'Neill became an admirer at the age of seventeen, after reading \"The Quintessence of Ibsenism\". Other Shaw-influenced American playwrights mentioned by Dukore are Elmer Rice, for whom Shaw \"opened doors, turned on lights, and expanded horizons\"; William Saroyan, who empathised with Shaw as \"the embattled individualist against the philistines\"; and S. N. Behrman, who was inspired to write for the theatre after attending a performance of \"Caesar and Cleopatra\": \"I thought it would be agreeable to write plays like that\".\n\nAssessing Shaw's reputation in a 1976 critical study, T. F. Evans described Shaw as unchallenged in his lifetime and since as the leading English-language dramatist of the century, and as a master of prose style. The following year, in a contrary assessment, the playwright John Osborne castigated \"The Guardian's\" theatre critic Michael Billington for referring to Shaw as \"the greatest British dramatist since Shakespeare\". Osborne responded that Shaw \"is the most fraudulent, inept writer of Victorian melodramas ever to gull a timid critic or fool a dull public\". Despite this hostility, Crawford sees the influence of Shaw in some of Osborne's plays, and concludes that though the latter's work is neither imitative nor derivative, these affinities are sufficient to classify Osborne as an inheritor of Shaw.\n\nIn a 1983 study, R. J. Kaufmann suggests that Shaw was a key forerunner—\"godfather, if not actually finicky paterfamilias\"—of the Theatre of the Absurd. Two further aspects of Shaw's theatrical legacy are noted by Crawford: his opposition to stage censorship, which was finally ended in 1968, and his efforts which extended over many years to establish a National Theatre. Shaw's short 1910 play \"The Dark Lady of the Sonnets\", in which Shakespeare pleads with Queen Elizabeth I for the endowment of a state theatre, was part of this campaign.\n\nWriting in \"The New Statesman\" in 2012 Daniel Janes commented that Shaw's reputation had declined by the time of his 150th anniversary in 2006 but had recovered considerably. In Janes's view, the many current revivals of Shaw's major works showed the playwright's \"almost unlimited relevance to our times\". In the same year, Mark Lawson wrote in \"The Guardian\" that Shaw's moral concerns engaged present-day audiences, and made him—like his model, Ibsen—one of the most popular playwrights in contemporary British theatre.\n\nIn the 1940s the author Harold Nicolson advised the National Trust not to accept the bequest of Shaw's Corner, predicting that Shaw would be totally forgotten within fifty years. In the event, Shaw's broad cultural legacy, embodied in the widely used term \"Shavian\", has endured and is nurtured by Shaw Societies in various parts of the world. The original society was founded in London in 1941 and survives; it organises meetings and events, and publishes a regular bulletin \"The Shavian\". The Shaw Society of America began in June 1950; it foundered in the 1970s but its journal, adopted by Penn State University Press, continued to be published as \"Shaw: The Annual of Bernard Shaw Studies\" until 2004. A second American organisation, founded in 1951 as \"The Bernard Shaw Society\", remains active as of 2016. The International Shaw Society was founded in 2002 and regularly sponsors Shaw symposia and conferences in Canada, the US, and other countries. More recent societies have been established in Japan and India.\n\nBesides his collected music criticism, Shaw has left a varied musical legacy, not all of it of his choosing. Despite his dislike of having his work adapted for the musical theatre (\"my plays set themselves to a verbal music of their own\") two of his plays were turned into musical comedies: \"Arms and the Man\" was the basis of \"The Chocolate Soldier\" in 1908, with music by Oscar Straus, and \"Pygmalion\" was adapted in 1956 as \"My Fair Lady\" with book and lyrics by Alan Jay Lerner and music by Frederick Loewe. Although he had a high regard for Elgar, Shaw turned down the composer's request for an opera libretto, but played a major part in persuading the BBC to commission Elgar's Third Symphony, and was the dedicatee of \"The Severn Suite\" (1930).\n\nThe substance of Shaw's political legacy is uncertain. In 1921 Shaw's erstwhile collaborator William Archer, in a letter to the playwright, wrote: \"I doubt if there is any case of a man so widely read, heard, seen, and known as yourself, who has produced so little effect on his generation.\" Margaret Cole, who considered Shaw the greatest writer of his age, professed never to have understood him. She thought he worked \"immensely hard\" at politics, but essentially, she surmises, it was for fun—\"the fun of a brilliant artist\". After Shaw's death, Pearson wrote: \"No one since the time of Tom Paine has had so definite an influence on the social and political life of his time and country as Bernard Shaw.\"\n\nIn its obituary tribute to Shaw, \"The Times Literary Supplement\" concluded:\n\n\n\n", "id": "12855", "title": "George Bernard Shaw"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12858", "text": "Galvanization\n\nGalvanization or galvanisation (or galvanizing as it is most commonly called in that industry) is the process of applying a protective zinc coating to steel or iron, to prevent rusting. The most common method is hot-dip galvanizing, in which parts are submerged in a bath of molten zinc. Galvanizing protects in three ways:\n\nThe earliest known example of galvanized iron was encountered by Europeans on 17th-century Indian armor in the Royal Armouries Museum collection. It was named in English via French from the name of Italian scientist Luigi Galvani. Originally, galvanizing was the administration of electric shocks, in the 19th century also termed Faradism. This sense is the origin of the meaning of the metaphorical use of the verb 'galvanize', such as to 'galvanize into action' meaning stimulating a complacent person or group to take action. The term galvanizing has largely come to be associated with zinc coatings, to the exclusion of other metals. Galvanic paint, a precursor to hot-dip galvanizing, was patented by Stanislas Sorel, of Paris in December, 1837.\n\nHot-dip galvanizing deposits a thick robust layer of zinc iron alloys on the surface of a steel item. In the case of automobile bodies, where additional decorative coatings of paint will be applied, a thinner form of galvanizing is applied by electrogalvanizing. The hot-dip process generally does not reduce strength on a measurable scale, with the exception of high-strength steels (>1100 MPa) where hydrogen embrittlement can become a problem. This is a consideration for the manufacture of wire rope and other highly stressed products. The protection provided by hot-dip galvanizing is insufficient for products that will be constantly exposed to corrosive materials such as acids. For these applications, more expensive stainless steel is preferred. Some nails made today are galvanized. Nonetheless, electroplating is used on its own for many outdoor applications because it is cheaper than hot-dip zinc coating and looks good when new. Another reason not to use hot-dip zinc coating is that for bolts and nuts size M10 (US 3/8\") or smaller, the thick hot-dipped coating fills in too much of the threads, which reduces strength (because the dimension of the steel prior to coating must be reduced for the fasteners to fit together). This means that for cars, bicycles, and many other light mechanical products, the alternative to electroplating bolts and nuts is not hot-dip zinc coating, but making the bolts and nuts from stainless steel.\n\nThe size of crystallites in galvanized coatings is a visible and aesthetic feature, known as \"spangle\". By varying the number of particles added for heterogeneous nucleation and the rate of cooling in a hot-dip process, the spangle can be adjusted from an apparently uniform surface (crystallites too small to see with the naked eye) to grains several centimetres wide. Visible crystallites are rare in other engineering materials.\n\nThermal diffusion galvanizing, or Sherardizing, provides a zinc diffusion coating on iron- or copper-based materials. Parts and zinc powder are tumbled in a sealed rotating drum. Around 300°C, zinc will diffuse into the substrate to form a zinc alloy. The preparation of the goods can be carried out by shot blasting. The process is also known as dry galvanizing, because no liquids are involved; however, no danger of hydrogen embrittlement of the goods exists. The dull-grey crystal structure of the zinc diffusion coating has a good adhesion to paint, powder coatings, or rubber. It is a preferred method for coating small, complex-shaped metals, and for smoothing rough surfaces on items formed with powder metal.\n\nAlthough galvanizing will inhibit attack of the underlying steel, rusting will be inevitable, after some decades, especially if exposed to acidic conditions. For example, corrugated iron sheet roofing will start to degrade within a few years despite the protective action of the zinc coating. Marine and salty environments also lower the lifetime of galvanized iron because the high electrical conductivity of sea water increases the rate of corrosion primarily through converting the solid zinc to soluble zinc chloride which simply washes away. Galvanized car frames exemplify this; they corrode much quicker in cold environments due to road salt, though they will last longer than unprotected steel. Galvanized steel can last for many decades if other means are maintained, such as paint coatings and additional sacrificial anodes. The rate of corrosion in non-salty environments is mainly due to levels of sulfur dioxide in the air. In the most benign natural environments, such as inland low population areas, galvanized steel can last without rust for over 100 years.\n\nIn the early 20th century, galvanized piping replaced cast iron and lead in cold-water plumbing. Typically, galvanized piping rusts from the inside out, building up plaques on the inside of the piping, causing both water pressure problems and eventual pipe failure. These plaques can flake off, leading to visible impurities in water and a slight metallic taste. The life expectancy of such piping is about 70 years, but it may vary by region due to impurities in the water supply and the proximity of electrical grids for which interior piping acts as a pathway (the flow of electricity can accelerate chemical corrosion). Pipe longevity also depends on the thickness of zinc in the original galvanizing, which ranges on a scale from G40 to G210, and whether the pipe was galvanized on both the inside and outside, or just the outside. Since World War II, copper and plastic piping have replaced galvanized piping for interior drinking water service, but galvanized steel pipes are still used in outdoor applications requiring steel's superior mechanical strength.\n\nThis lends some truth to the urban myth that water purity in outdoor water faucets is lower, but the actual impurities (iron, zinc, calcium) are harmless.\n\nThe presence of galvanized piping detracts from the appraised value of housing stock because piping can fail, increasing the risk of water damage. Galvanized piping will eventually need to be replaced if housing stock is to outlast a 50 to 70 year life expectancy, and some jurisdictions require galvanized piping to be replaced before sale. One option to extend the life expectancy of existing galvanized piping is to line it with an epoxy resin.\n\nThis is the most common use for galvanizing, and hundreds of thousands of tonnes are galvanized annually worldwide. In developed countries most larger cities have several galvanizing factories, and many items of steel manufacture are galvanized for protection. Typically these include: street furniture, building frameworks, balconies, verandahs, staircases, ladders, walkways and more. SGCC hot dip galvanized steel is also used for making steel frames as a basic construction material for steel frame buildings.\n\n", "id": "12858", "title": "Galvanization"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12859", "text": "Golden Rule\n\nThe Golden Rule or law of reciprocity is the principle of treating others as one would wish to be treated oneself. It is a maxim of altruism seen in many human religions and human cultures.\nThe maxim may appear as either a positive or negative injunction governing conduct:\n\n\nThe Golden Rule differs from the maxim of reciprocity captured in \"do ut des\"—\"I give so that you will give in return\"—and is rather a unilateral moral commitment to the well-being of the other without the expectation of anything in return.\n\nThe concept occurs in some form in nearly every religion and ethical tradition. It can also be explained from the perspectives of psychology, philosophy, sociology, and economics. Psychologically, it involves a person empathizing with others. Philosophically, it involves a person perceiving their neighbor also as \"I\" or \"self\". Sociologically, 'love your neighbor as yourself' is applicable between individuals, between groups, and also between individuals and groups. In economics, Richard Swift, referring to ideas from David Graeber, suggests that \"without some kind of reciprocity society would no longer be able to exist.\"\n\nThe \"term\" \"Golden Rule\", or \"Golden law\" began to be used widely in the early 17th century in Britain; the earliest known usage is that of Charles Gibbon in 1604.\n\nPossibly the earliest affirmation of the maxim of reciprocity, reflecting the ancient Egyptian goddess Ma'at, appears in the story of The Eloquent Peasant, which dates to the Middle Kingdom (c. 2040 – c. 1650 BC): \"Now this is the command: Do to the doer to make him do.\" This proverb embodies the \"do ut des\" principle. A Late Period (c. 664 BC – 323 BC) papyrus contains an early negative affirmation of the Golden Rule: \"That which you hate to be done to you, do not do to another.\"\n\nThe Golden Rule appears in the following Biblical verse:\n\"You shall not take vengeance or bear a grudge against your kinsfolk. Love your neighbor as yourself: I am the LORD.\" ()\n\nThe Golden Rule existed among all the major philosophical schools of ancient China: Mohism, Taoism, and Confucianism. Examples of the concept include:\n\nIn \"Mahābhārata\", the ancient epic of India, there is a discourse in which the wise minister Vidura advises the King \"Yuddhiśhṭhira\" thus, \"Listening to wise scriptures, austerity, sacrifice, respectful faith, social welfare, forgiveness, purity of intent, compassion, truth and self-control — are the ten wealth of character (self). O king aim for these, may you be steadfast in these qualities. These are the basis of prosperity and rightful living. These are highest attainable things. All worlds are balanced on \"dharma\", \"dharma\" encompasses ways to prosperity as well. O King, \"dharma\" is the best quality to have, wealth the medium and desire (\"kāma\") the lowest. Hence, (keeping these in mind), by self-control and by making \"dharma\" (right conduct) your main focus, treat others as you treat yourself.\"\n\n\"tasmād_dharma-pradhānéna bhavitavyam yatātmanā\" | \"tathā cha sarva-bhūtéṣhu vartitavyam yathātmani\" || (तस्माद्धर्मप्रधानेन भवितव्यं यतात्मना। तथा च सर्वभूतेषु वर्तितव्यं यथात्मन।॥ || \"Mahābhārata Shānti-Parva\" 167:9)\n\nIn the Section on Virtue, and Chapter 32 of the Tirukkuṛaḷ (c. 200 BC – c. 500 AD), Tiruvalluvar says: Why does a man inflict upon other creatures those sufferings, which he has found by experience are sufferings to himself ? (K. 318) Let not a man consent to do those things to another which, he knows, will cause sorrow. (K. 316) He furthermore opined that it is the determination of the spotless (virtuous) not to do evil, even in return, to those who have cherished enmity and done them evil. (K. 312) The (proper) punishment to those who have done evil (to you), is to put them to shame by showing them kindness, in return and to forget both the evil and the good done on both sides. (K. 314)\n\nThe Golden Rule in its prohibitive (negative) form was a common principle in ancient Greek philosophy. Examples of the general concept include:\n\nThe Pahlavi Texts of Zoroastrianism (c. 300 BC–1000 AD) were an early source for the Golden Rule: \"That nature alone is good which refrains from doing to another whatsoever is not good for itself.\" Dadisten-I-dinik, 94,5, and \"Whatever is disagreeable to yourself do not do unto others.\" Shayast-na-Shayast 13:29\n\nSeneca the Younger (c. 4 BC–65 AD), a practitioner of Stoicism (c. 300 BC–200 AD) expressed the Golden Rule in his essay regarding the treatment of slaves: \"Treat your inferior as you would wish your superior to treat you.\" The Stoic Philosophy of Seneca.\n\nA rule of altruistic reciprocity was first stated positively in a well-known Torah verse (Hebrew: ):\nHillel the Elder (c. 110 BCE – 10 CE), used this verse as a most important message of the Torah for his teachings. Once, he was challenged by a gentile who asked to be converted under the condition that the Torah be explained to him while he stood on one foot. Hillel accepted him as a candidate for conversion to Judaism but, drawing on , briefed the man:\nHillel recognized brotherly love as the fundamental principle of Jewish ethics. Rabbi Akiva agreed and suggested that the principle of love must have its foundation in Genesis chapter 1, which teaches that all men are the offspring of Adam who was made in the image of God (Sifra, Ḳedoshim, iv.; Yer. Ned. ix. 41c; Genesis Rabba 24). According to Jewish rabbinic literature, the first man Adam represents the \"unity of mankind\". This is echoed in the modern preamble of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. And it is also taught, that Adam is last in order according to the evolutionary character of God's creation:Why was only a single specimen of man created first? To teach us that he who destroys a single soul destroys a whole world and that he who saves a single soul saves a whole world; furthermore, so no race or class may claim a nobler ancestry, saying, 'Our father was born first'; and, finally, to give testimony to the greatness of the Lord, who caused the wonderful diversity of mankind to emanate from one type. And why was Adam created last of all beings? To teach him humility; for if he be overbearing, let him remember that the little fly preceded him in the order of creation.\n\nThe Jewish Publication Society's edition of Leviticus:\n\nThis Torah verse represents one of several versions of the \"Golden Rule\", which itself appears in various forms, positive and negative. It is the earliest written version of that concept in a positive form.\n\nAt the turn of the eras, the Jewish rabbis were discussing the scope of the meaning of Leviticus 19:18 and 19:34 extensively:\n\nCommentators summed up foreigners (= Samaritans), proselytes (= 'strangers who resides with you') (Rabbi Akiva, bQuid 75b) or Jews (Rabbi Gamaliel, yKet 3,1; 27a) to the scope of the meaning.\n\nThe Sage Hillel formulated an alternative form of the golden rule. When asked to sum up the entire Torah concisely, he explained, and taught the proselyte:\n\nOn the verse, \"Love your fellow as yourself,\" the classic commentator Rashi quotes from Torat Kohanim, an early Midrashic text regarding the famous dictum of Rabbi Akiva: \"Love your fellow as yourself — Rabbi Akiva says this is a great principle of the Torah.\"\n\nIsrael's postal service quoted from the previous Leviticus verse when it commemorated the Universal Declaration of Human Rights on a 1958 postage stamp.\n\nAccording to Simon Blackburn, although the Golden Rule \"can be found in some form in almost every ethical tradition\", the rule is \"sometimes claimed by Christianity as its own\". The \"Golden Rule\" has been attributed to Jesus of Nazareth, who used it to summarize the Torah: \"Do to others what you want them to do to you. This is the meaning of the law of Moses and the teaching of the prophets\" (Matthew 7:12 NCV, see also ). The common English phrasing is \"Do unto others as you would have them do unto you\". A similar form appeared in a Catholic catechism around 1567 (certainly in the reprint of 1583).\nThe Golden Rule is stated positively numerous times in the Hebrew Pentateuch as well as the Prophets and Writings. (\"Forget about the wrong things people do to you, and do not try to get even. Love your neighbor as you love yourself.\"; see also Great Commandment) and (\"But treat them just as you treat your own citizens. Love foreigners as you love yourselves, because you were foreigners one time in Egypt. I am the Lord your God.\").\n\nThe Old Testament Deuterocanonical books of Tobit and Sirach, accepted as part of the Scriptural canon by Catholic Church, Eastern Orthodoxy, and the Non-Chalcedonian Churches, express a negative form of the golden rule:\n\nAt the time of Hillel, an elder contemporary of Jesus of Nazareth, the negative form of the golden rule was already proverbial among Second Temple Jews. When asked to sum up the entire Torah concisely, he answered:\n\nTwo passages in the New Testament quote Jesus of Nazareth espousing the positive form of the rule:\n\nA similar passage, a parallel to the Great Commandment, is \n\nThe passage in the book of Luke then continues with Jesus answering the question, \"Who is my neighbor?\", by telling the parable of the Good Samaritan, indicating that \"your neighbor\" is anyone in need. This extends to all, including those who are generally considered hostile.\n\nJesus' teaching goes beyond the negative formulation of not doing what one would not like done to themselves, to the positive formulation of actively doing good to another that, if the situations were reversed, one would desire that the other would do for them. This formulation, as indicated in the parable of the Good Samaritan, emphasizes the needs for positive action that brings benefit to another, not simply restraining oneself from negative activities that hurt another. Taken as a rule of judgment, both formulations of the golden rule, the negative and positive, are equally applicable.\n\nIn one passage of the New Testament Paul the Apostle refers to the golden rule:\n\nThe Golden Rule is implicitly expressed in some verses of the Quran, and is explicitly declared in the sayings of Muhammad. A common transliteration is: \"ِAheb li akheek ma tuhibu li nafsik\". This can be translated as \"Wish for your brother, what you wish for yourself\" or \"Love for your brother what you love for yourself\".\n\nFrom the Quran: the first verse recommends the positive form of the rule, and the subsequent verses condemn not abiding the negative form of the Golden Rule:\n\nFrom the hadith, the collected oral and written accounts of Muhammad and his teachings during his lifetime:\n\nAli ibn Abi Talib (4th Caliph in Sunni Islam, and first Imam in Shia Islam) says:\nThe Writings of the Bahá'í Faith while encouraging everyone to treat others as they would treat themselves, go further by introducing the concept of preferring others before oneself:\n\nAlso,\nBuddha (Siddhartha Gautama, c. 623 – c. 543 BC) made this principle one of the cornerstones of his ethics in the 6th century BC. It occurs in many places and in many forms throughout the Tripitaka.\n\nThe Golden Rule is paramount in the Jainist philosophy and can be seen in the doctrines of Ahimsa and Karma. As part of the prohibition of causing any living beings to suffer, Jainism forbids inflicting upon others what is harmful to oneself.\n\nThe following quotation from the Acaranga Sutra sums up the philosophy of Jainism:\n\nSaman Suttam of Jinendra Varni gives further insight into this precept:-\n\nThe same idea is also presented in V.12 and VI.30 of the \"Analects\" (c. 500 BC), which can be found in the online Chinese Text Project. It should be noted, however, that the phraseology differs from the Christian version of the Golden Rule. It does not presume to do anything unto others, but merely to avoid doing what would be harmful. It does not preclude doing good deeds and taking moral positions, but there is slim possibility for a Confucian missionary outlook, such as one can justify with the Christian Golden Rule.\n\nMozi regarded the golden rule as a corollary to the cardinal virtue of impartiality, and encouraged egalitarianism and selflessness in relationships.\n\nThe Way to Happiness expresses the Golden Rule both in its negative/prohibitive form and in its positive form. The negative/prohibitive form is expressed in Precept 19 as:\n\nThe positive form is expressed in Precept 20 as:\n\nThe \"Declaration Toward a Global Ethic\" from the Parliament of the World’s Religions (1993) proclaimed the Golden Rule (\"We must treat others as we wish others to treat us\") as the common principle for many religions. The Initial Declaration was signed by 143 leaders from all of the world's major faiths, including Baha'i Faith, Brahmanism, Brahma Kumaris, Buddhism, Christianity, Hinduism, Indigenous, Interfaith, Islam, Jainism, Judaism, Native American, Neo-Pagan, Sikhism, Taoism, Theosophist, Unitarian Universalist and Zoroastrian. In the folklore of several cultures the Golden Rule is depicted by the allegory of the long spoons.\n\nMany different sources claim the Golden Rule as a humanist principle:\n\nIn the view of Greg M. Epstein, a Humanist chaplain at Harvard University, \" 'do unto others' ... is a concept that essentially no religion misses entirely. \"But not a single one of these versions of the golden rule requires a God\"\". At least the Biblical accounts, however, portray the obligation to love one's neighbor as oneself as a corollary of a more basic obligation to love God with one's entire being.\n\nAccording to Marc H. Bornstein, and William E. Paden, the Golden Rule is arguably the most essential basis for the modern concept of human rights, in which each individual has a right to just treatment, and a reciprocal responsibility to ensure justice for others.\n\nHowever Leo Damrosch argued that the notion that the Golden Rule pertains to \"rights\" per se is a contemporary interpretation and has nothing to do with its origin. The development of human \"rights\" is a modern political ideal that began as a philosophical concept promulgated through the philosophy of Jean Jacques Rousseau in 18th century France, among others. His writings influenced Thomas Jefferson, who then incorporated Rousseau's reference to \"inalienable rights\" into the United States Declaration of Independence in 1776. Damrosch argued that to confuse the Golden Rule with human rights is to apply contemporary thinking to ancient concepts.\n\nRichard Swift, referring to ideas from David Graeber, suggests that \"without some kind of reciprocity society would no longer be able to exist.\" His article, \"Pathways & possibilities\", has a subsection called \"\"A reciprocal economy\"\" which refers to Graeber's concept of : Swift writes: \"If we treated each other ... strictly on the basis of profit and loss, life would be intolerable. So why shouldn't we make the principle of generous reciprocity, so present in everyday interactions, the basis of economic life rather than the current model of competing egoism?\"\n\nIf the negative/prohibitive form of the Golden Rule would stand \"alone\", it would simply serve as a proactive motivation \"against\" wrong action. But the Golden Rule \"in general\" actually serves as a motivation \"toward\" proactive action. As Frank Crane put it, \"The Golden Rule is of no use to you whatsoever unless you realize that it's your move!\"\n\nCharles Kingsley's \"The Water Babies\" (1863) includes a character named Mrs Do-As-You-Would-Be-Done-By (and another, Mrs Be-Done-By-As-You-Did).\n\nPhilosophers, such as Immanuel Kant and Friedrich Nietzsche, have objected to the rule on a variety of grounds. The most serious among these is its application. How does one know how others want to be treated? The obvious way is to ask them, but this cannot be done if one assumes they have not reached a particular and relevant understanding.\n\nShaw's comment about differing tastes suggests that if your values are not shared with others, the way you want to be treated will not be the way they want to be treated. Hence, the Golden Rule of \"due unto others\" is \"dangerous in the wrong hands,\" according to philosopher Iain King, because \"some fanatics have no aversion to death: the Golden Rule might inspire them to kill others in suicide missions.\"\n\nImmanuel Kant famously criticized the golden rule for not being sensitive to differences of situation, noting that a prisoner duly convicted of a crime could appeal to the golden rule while asking the judge to release him, pointing out that the judge would not want anyone else to send him to prison, so he should not do so to others. Kant's \"Categorical Imperative\", introduced in \"Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals\", is often confused with the Golden Rule.\n\nIn his book \"How to Make Good Decisions and Be Right All the Time\", philosopher Iain King has argued that \"(although) the idea of mirroring your treatment of others with their treatment of you is very widespread indeed… most ancient wisdoms express this negatively – advice on what you should not do, rather than what you should.\" He argues this creates a bias in favour of inertia which allows bad actions and states of affairs to persist. The positive formulation, meanwhile, can be \"incendiary\", since it \"can lead to cycles of tit-for-tat reciprocity,\" unless it is accompanied by a corrective mechanism, such as a concept of forgiveness. Therefore, he concludes that there can be no viable formulation of the Golden Rule, unless it is heavily qualified by other maxims.\n\nWalter Terence Stace, in \"The Concept of Morals\" (1937), wrote:\n\nMarcus George Singer observed that there are two importantly different ways of looking at the golden rule: as requiring (1) that you perform specific actions that you want others to do to you or (2) that you guide your behavior in the same general ways that you want others to. Counter-examples to the golden rule typically are more forceful against the first than the second.\n\nIn his book on the golden rule, Jeffrey Wattles makes the similar observation that such objections typically arise while applying the golden rule in certain general ways (namely, ignoring differences in taste, in situation, and so forth). But if we apply the golden rule to our own method of using it, asking in effect if we would want other people to apply the golden rule in such ways, the answer would typically be no, since it is quite predictable that others' ignoring of such factors will lead to behavior which we object to. It follows that we should not do so ourselves—according to the golden rule. In this way, the golden rule may be self-correcting. An article by Jouni Reinikainen develops this suggestion in greater detail.\n\nIt is possible, then, that the golden rule can itself guide us in identifying which differences of situation are morally relevant. We would often want other people to ignore any prejudice against our race or nationality when deciding how to act towards us, but would also want them to not ignore our differing preferences in food, desire for aggressiveness, and so on. The platinum rule, and perhaps other variants, might also be self-correcting in this same manner.\n\nThere has been research published arguing that some 'sense' of fair play and the Golden Rule may be stated and rooted in terms of neuroscientific and neuroethical principles.\n\n\n", "id": "12859", "title": "Golden Rule"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12861", "text": "Governor of New York\n\nThe Governor of the State of New York is the chief executive of the U.S. state of New York. The governor is the head of the executive branch of New York's state government and the commander-in-chief of the state's military and naval forces.\n\nThe current governor is Andrew Cuomo, a Democrat. Cuomo won the November 2010 gubernatorial election and was sworn in as the 56th governor of the state of New York on January 1, 2011. Cuomo was re-elected on November 5, 2014, defeating his Republican challenger Robert Astorino.\n\nThe governor has a duty to enforce state laws, and the power to either approve or veto bills passed by the New York State Legislature, to convene the legislature, and to grant pardons, except in cases of treason and impeachment. Unlike the other government departments that compose the executive branch of government, the governor is themselves head of the state Executive Department. The officeholder is afforded the courtesy style of \"His/Her Excellency\" while in office.\n\nThe governor of New York is often considered a potential candidate for President. Ten governors have been major-party candidates for president, and four, Martin Van Buren, Grover Cleveland, Theodore Roosevelt, and Franklin D. Roosevelt have won. Six New York governors have gone on to serve as vice president. Additionally two Governors of New York, John Jay and Charles Evans Hughes, have served as Chief Justice of the United States.\n\nUnder the New York State Constitution, a person must be at least 30 years of age, a United States citizen, and a resident of the state of New York for at least five years prior to being elected to serve as governor.\n\nThe office of Governor was established by the first New York State Constitution in 1777 to coincide with the calendar year. An 1874 amendment extended the term of office back to three years, but the 1894 constitution again reduced it to two years. The most recent constitution of 1938 extended the term to the current four years.\n\nThe state constitution has provided since 1777 for the election of a lieutenant governor, who also acts as president of the state senate, to the same term (keeping the same term lengths as the governor throughout all the constitutional revisions). Originally, in the event of the death, resignation or impeachment of the governor, or absence from the state, the lieutenant governor would take on the governor's duties and powers. Since the 1938 constitution, the lieutenant governor explicitly becomes governor upon such vacancy in the office.\n\nShould the office of lieutenant governor become vacant, the president \"pro tempore\" of the state senate performs the duties of a lieutenant governor until the governor can take back the duties of the office, or the next election; likewise, should both offices become vacant, the president \"pro tempore\" acts as governor, with the office of lieutenant governor remaining vacant. Although no provision exists in the constitution for it, precedent set in 2009 allows the governor to appoint a lieutenant governor should a vacancy occur. Should the president \"pro tempore\" be unable to fulfill the duties, the speaker of the assembly is next in the line of succession. The lieutenant governor is elected on the same ticket as the governor, but nominated separately.\n\nLine of succession in full\n\n\n\n", "id": "12861", "title": "Governor of New York"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12862", "text": "Glasnevin\n\nGlasnevin (, also known as \"Glas Naedhe\", meaning \"stream of O'Naeidhe\" after an ancient chieftain) is a largely residential middle-class neighbourhood of Dublin, Ireland. It is also a civil parish in the ancient barony of Coolock. Dublin City University has three campuses located in the parish at Ballymun Road, Griffith Avenue and Old Finglas Road. \n\nA mainly residential neighbourhood, it is located on the Northside of the city of Dublin (about 3 km north of Dublin City centre). It was originally established on the northern bank of the River Tolka. It is bordered to the north by Finglas, northeast by Ballymun and Santry, Whitehall to the east, Phibsboro and Drumcondra to the south and Cabra to the west.\n\nGlasnevin is part of the Dáil Éireann constituency of Dublin Central and Dublin North-West\n\nGlasnevin seems to have been founded by Saint Mobhi (sometimes known as St Berchan) in the sixth (or perhaps fifth) century as a monastery. His monastery continued to be used for many years afterwards - St. Colman is recorded as having paid homage to its founder when he returned from abroad to visit Ireland a century after St Mobhi's death in 544. St. Columba of Iona is thought to have studied under St. Mobhi, but left Glasnevin following an outbreak of plague and journeyed north to open the House at Derry. There is a long street (Iona Road) in Glasnevin named in his honour. The church on Iona Road is called Saint Columba's.\n\nA settlement grew up around this monastery, which survived until the Viking invasions in the eighth century. After raids on monasteries at Glendalough and Clondalkin, the monasteries at Glasnevin and Finglas were attacked and destroyed.\n\nBy 822 Glasnevin, along with Grangegorman and Clonken or Clonkene (now known as Deansgrange), had become the farm for Christ Church Cathedral and it seems to have maintained this connection up to the time of the Reformation.\n\nThe Battle of Clontarf was fought on the banks of the River Tolka in 1014 (a field called the \"bloody acre\" is supposed to be part of the site). The Irish defeated the Danes in a battle, in which 7,000 Danes and 4,000 Irish died.\n\nThe 12th century saw the Normans (who had conquered England and Wales in the eleventh century) invade Ireland. As local rulers continued fighting amongst themselves the Norman King of England Henry II was invited to intervene. He arrived in 1171, took control of much land, and then parcelled it out amongst his supporters. Glasnevin ended up under the jurisdiction of Finglas Abbey. Laurence O'Toole, Archbishop of Dublin, took responsibility for Glasnevin. It became the property the Holy Trinity (Christ Church Cathedral).\n\nIn 1240 a church and tower was reconstructed on the site of the Church of St. Mobhi in the monastery. The returns of the church for 1326 stated that 28 tenants resided in Glasnevin. The church was enlarged in 1346, along with a small hall known as the Manor Hall.\n\nWhen King Henry VIII broke from Rome an era of religious repression began. During the Dissolution of the Monasteries, Catholic Church property and land was appropriated to the new Church of England, and monasteries (including the one at Glasnevin) were forcibly closed and fell into ruin. Glasnevin had at this stage developed as a village, with its principal landmark and focal point being its \"bull-ring\" noted in 1542.\n\nBy 1667 Glasnevin had expanded - but not by very much; it is recorded as containing 24 houses. The development of the village was given a fresh impetus when Sir John Rogerson built his country residence, \"The Glen\" or \"Glasnevin House\" outside the village.\n\nA Protestant church, St. Mobhi's, was built in the mid 17th century and most of it was rebuilt in the mid 18th century. It was part of a site where the ancient monastery of St. Mobhi once stood. It is said that Robert Emmet is buried there. This claim is made because once somebody working in the graveyard there dug up a headless body.\n\nThe plantations of Ireland saw the settlement of Protestant English families on land previously held by Catholics. Lands at Glasnevin were leased to such families and a Protestant church was erected there in 1707. It was built on the site of the old Catholic Church and was named after St. Mobhi. The attached churchyard became a graveyard for both Protestants and Catholics.\n\nBy now Glasnevin was an area for families of distinction - in spite of a comment attributed to the Protestant Archbishop King of Dublin that \"when any couple had a mind to be wicked, they would retire to Glasnevin\". In a letter, dated 1725 he described Glasnevin as \"the receptacle for thieves and rogues. The first search when anything was stolen, was there, and when any couple had a mind to retire to be wicked there was their harbour. But since the church was built, and service regularly settled, all these evils are banished. Good houses are built in it, and the place civilised.\" Glasnevin National School was also built during this period.\n\nGlasnevin became a township in 1878 and became part of the City of Dublin in 1900 under the Dublin Boundaries Act when it received the Royal Assent on August 6, 1900.\n\nThe parish population was recorded as 1,001, of whom 559 resided in the village. Glasnevin was described as a parish in the barony of Coolock, pleasantly situated and the residence of many families of distinction.\n\nWhen Drumcondra began to rapidly expand in the 1870s, the residents of Glasnevin sought to protect their district and opposed being merged with the neighbouring suburb. One of the objectors was the property-owner, Dr Gogarty, the father of the Irish poet, Oliver St. John Gogarty.\n\nOn 1 June 1832, Charles Lindsay, Bishop of Kildare and Leighlin and the William John released their holdings of Sir John Rogerson's lands at Glasnevin, (including Glasnevin House) to George Hayward Lindsay. This transfer included the sum of 1,500 Pounds Sterling. Although this does not specifically cite the marriage of George Hayward Lindsay to Lady Mary Catherine Gore, George Lindsay almost certainly came into the lands at Glasnevin as a result of his marriage.\n\nGeorge Hayward Lindsay's eldest son, Lieutenant Colonel Henry Gore Lindsay, was in possession of his father's lands at Glasnevin when the area began to be developed at the beginning of the twentieth-century. The development of his lands after 1903/04 marked the start of the gradual development of the area.\n\nGlasnevin remained relatively undeveloped until the opening up of the Carroll Estate in 1914, which saw the creation of the redbrick residential roads running down towards Drumcondra. The process was accelerated by Dublin Corporation in the 1920s and the present shape of the suburb was firmly in place by 1930. Nevertheless, until comparatively recent years, a short stroll up the Old Finglas Road brought you rapidly into open countryside.\n\nThe start of the 20th century also saw the opening of a short lived railway station on the Drumcondra and North Dublin Link Railway line from Glasnevin Junction to Connolly Station (then Amiens Street). It opened in 1906 and closed at the end of 1907. Glasnevin railway station opened on 1 April 1901 and closed on 1 December 1910.\n\nThe village has changed a lot over the years, and is now part of Dublin City. It is now largely a mix of young families, senior citizens and students attending Dublin City University.\n\nAs well as the amenities of the National Botanic Gardens (Ireland) and local parks, the national meteorological office Met Éireann, the Fisheries Board, the National Standards Authority of Ireland, Sustainable Energy Ireland, the National Metrology Laboratory (NML), the Department of Defence and the national enterprise and trade board Enterprise Ireland are all located in the area.\n\nThe house and lands of the poet Thomas Tickell were sold in 1790 to the Irish Parliament and given to the Royal Dublin Society for them to establish Ireland's first Botanic Gardens. The gardens were the first location in Ireland where the infection responsible for the 1845–1847 potato famine was identified. Throughout the famine research to stop the infection was undertaken at the gardens.\n\nThe which border the River Tolka also adjoin the Prospect Cemetery. In 2002 the Botanic Gardens gained a new two-storey complex which included a new cafe and a large lecture theatre. The Irish National Herbarium is also located at the botanic gardens.\n\nProspect Cemetery is located in Glasnevin, although better known as Glasnevin Cemetery, the most historically notable burial place in the country and the last resting place, among a host of historical figures, of Michael Collins, Eamon DeValera, Charles Stewart Parnell and also Arthur Griffith. This graveyard led to Glasnevin being known as \"the dead centre of Dublin\". It opened in 1832 and is the final resting place for thousands of ordinary citizens, as well as many Irish patriots.\n\nApproaching Glasnevin via Phibsboro is what is known as \"Hart's Corner\" but which about 200 years ago was called Glasmanogue, and was then a well-known stage on the way to Finglas. At an earlier date the name possessed a wider signification and was applied to a considerable portion of the adjoining district.\n\nAt the start of the 18th century a large house, called Delville - known at first as The Glen - was built on the site of the present Bon Secours Hospital, Dublin. Its name was an amalgamation of the surnames of two tenants, Dr. Helsam and Dr. Patrick Delany (as Heldeville), both Fellows of Trinity College.\n\nWhen Delany married his first wife he acquired sole ownership, but it became famous as the home of Delany and his second wife - Mary Pendarves. She was a widow whom Delany married in 1743, and was an accomplished letter writer.\n\nThey couple were friends of Dean Jonathan Swift and, through him, of Alexander Pope. Pope encouraged the Delaneys to develop a garden in a style then becoming popular in England - moving away from the very formal, geometric layout that was common. He redesigned the house in the style of a villa and had the gardens laid out in the latest Dutch fashion creating what was almost certainly Ireland's first naturalistic garden.\n\nThe house was, under Mrs Delany, a centre of Dublin's intellectual life. Swift is said to have composed many of his campaigning pamphlets while staying there. He and his life - long companion Stella were both in the habit of visiting, and Swift satirised the grounds which he considered too small for the size of the house. Through her correspondence with her sister, Mrs Dewes, Mary wrote of Swift in 1733: \"he calls himself my master and corrects me when I speak bad English or do not pronounce my words distinctly\".\n\nPatrick Delany died in 1768 at the age of 82, prompting his widow to sell Delville and return to her native England until her death twenty years later.\n\nGlasnevin is also a parish in the Fingal South West deanery of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Dublin. It is served by the Church of Lady of Dolours. The church underwent some refurbishment work inside and in its grounds and car park during the first half of 2011. A timber church, which originally stood on Berkeley Road, was moved to a riverside site on Botanic Avenue early in the twentieth century. The altar in this church was from Newgate prison in Dublin. It served as the parish church until it was replaced, in 1972, by a structure resembling a pyramid when viewed from Botanic Avenue. The previous church was known locally as \"The Woodener\" or \"The Wooden\" and the new building is still known to older residents as \"The new Woodener\" or \"The Wigwam\".\n\nIn 1975 the new headquarters of Met Éireann, the Irish Meteorological Office, opened just off Glasnevin Hill, on the former site of Marlborough House. The Met Éireann building too was built in a somewhat pyramidal shape and is recognised as one of the most significant, smaller commercial buildings, to be erected in Dublin in the 1970s.\n\nGriffith Avenue, which runs through Glasnevin, Drumcondra and Marino. The avenue spans three electoral constituencies, and is the longest tree-lined avenue in the Northern Hemisphere with no retail outlets. It was named after Arthur Griffith who was the founder and third leader of Sinn Féin and also served as President of Dáil Éireann. Arthur Griffith also was buried in Glasnevin Cemetery.\n\nThe Gaelic games of Gaelic football, hurling, camogie and Gaelic handball are all organised locally by Na Fianna CLG, while soccer is played by local clubs Iona FC(now defunct), Tolka Rovers, Glasnevin FC and Glasnaion FC. They celebrated their 125th anniversary in 2006. Basketball is organised by Tolka Rovers. Tennis is played in Charleville Lawn Tennis Club, founded in 1894 by a small group of tennis enthusiasts headed by a Mrs McConnell. Charleville took its name from the original location at the corner of the Charleville and Cabra Roads. The move to its present location on Whitworth Road took place in 1904. The club boasts a membership of 400 senior and junior members and the club has won many Dublin Lawn Tennis Council titles, above the average for a club of their size. Hockey is also played in Botanic Hockey club on the Old Finglas Road. Glasnevin Boxing Club and Football(soccer) club has a clubhouse on Mobhi road.\n\nScouting has a strong tradition in Glasnevin with 1st Dublin (L.H.O) Scout Troop located on the corner of Griffith Avenue and Ballygall Road East. The Scout group celebrated 100 years of Scouting in 2011 making it one of the longest established Scout Groups in the world.\n\nThere are several primary schools in Glasnevin, including Lindsay Road National School, Glasnevin National School, Glasnevin Educate Together National school, North Dublin National School Project, Scoil Mobhi, St.Brigids GNS, St.Columbas NS and St.Vincents CBS.\n\nThere are several Roman Catholic secondary schools in the area St Vincent's (Christian Brothers) School, Scoil Chaitríona and St Mary's Secondary School.\n\nBilly Whelan, one of the eight Manchester United players who lost their lives in the Munich air disaster of 6 February 1958, was born locally on 1 April 1935. He is buried in Glasnevin Cemetery.\n\n\n\n", "id": "12862", "title": "Glasnevin"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12863", "text": "George Abbot (author)\n\nGeorge Abbot or Abbott (16042 February 1648) was an English lay writer, known as \"The Puritan\", and a politician who sat in the House of Commons in two periods between 1640 and 1648. He is known also for his part in defending Caldecote House against royalist forces in the early days of the English Civil War.\n\nAbbott was the son of George Abbott of York (died 1607) and his wife Joan Penkeston. While \"Alumni Cantabrigienses\" states that he matriculated at King's College, Cambridge in 1622, the \"Oxford Dictionary of National Biography\" discounts the identification, for lack of evidence. He owned property in Baddesley Clinton, Warwickshire, and was a good friend of Richard Vines, minister at Caldecote some way to the east. In April 1640, he was elected Member of Parliament for Tamworth in the Short Parliament. \nIn the English Civil War, Abbot worked closely in Warwickshire with his stepfather William Purefoy, and made a notable defence, with his mother Joan, of the Purefoy house at Caldecote, Warwickshire, gaining the family coverage in the London press. On 15 August 1642, with eight men, his mother and maids, he held out for a time against Prince Rupert of the Rhine, with about 18 troops of horses and dragoons. In the aftermath of the Battle of Edgehill, in October of the same year, Richard Baxter moved to Coventry, and Abbot was one of those hearing him preach there. Baxter in writing on the Sabbath referred to \"my dear friend Mr. George Abbot\". In his memoirs \"Reliquiæ Baxterianæ\", Baxter placed Abbot's defence of Caldecote House, where barns were burnt, in local context: royalists under Spencer Compton, 2nd Earl of Northampton were attacking Warwick Castle, defended by John Bridges, and Coventry, defended by John Barker.\n\nAbbot was re-elected MP for Tamworth in 1645 for the Long Parliament and held the seat until his death in 1648. He died unmarried in his 44th year, and was buried in Caldecote church where his monument describes his defence of Caldecote.\n\nBy his will, Abbot endowed a free school at Caldecote. It was supported by land left to it at Baddesley Ensor.\n\nAbbot was a lay theologian and scholar. His \"Whole Booke of Job Paraphrased, or made easy for any to understand\" (1640), was written in a terse style, and his \"Vindiciae Sabbathi\" (1641) influenced the Sabbatarian controversy. His \"The Whole Book of Psalms Paraphrased\" (1650) was published posthumously by Richard Vines, and dedicated to Joan Purefoy, his mother.\n\nAbbot has been confused with others of the same name and has been described as a clergyman, which he never was. His writings have been incorrectly attributed in the bibliographical authorities to a relation of George Abbot the archbishop of Canterbury. One of the sons of Sir Morris Abbot called George was also an MP in the Short Parliament but for the constituency of Guildford.\n\n\n \n\n \n", "id": "12863", "title": "George Abbot (author)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12866", "text": "Globular cluster\n\nA globular cluster is a spherical collection of stars that orbits a galactic core as a satellite. Globular clusters are very tightly bound by gravity, which gives them their spherical shapes and relatively high stellar densities toward their centers. The name of this category of star cluster is derived from the Latin \"globulus\"—a small sphere. A globular cluster is sometimes known more simply as a \"globular\".\n\nGlobular clusters, which are found in the halo of a galaxy, contain considerably more stars and are much older than the less dense galactic, or open clusters, which are found in the disk. Globular clusters are fairly common; there are about 150 to 158 currently known globular clusters in the Milky Way, with perhaps 10 to 20 more still undiscovered. These globular clusters orbit the Galaxy at radii of 40 kiloparsecs (130,000 light-years) or more. Larger galaxies can have more: Andromeda Galaxy, for instance, may have as many as 500. Some giant elliptical galaxies (particularly those at the centers of galaxy clusters) such as M87, have as many as 13,000 globular clusters.\n\nEvery galaxy of sufficient mass in the Local Group has an associated group of globular clusters, and almost every large galaxy surveyed has been found to possess a system of globular clusters. The Sagittarius Dwarf galaxy and the disputed Canis Major Dwarf galaxy appear to be in the process of donating their associated globular clusters (such as Palomar 12) to the Milky Way. This demonstrates how many of this galaxy's globular clusters might have been acquired in the past.\n\nAlthough it appears that globular clusters contain some of the first stars to be produced in the galaxy, their origins and their role in galactic evolution are still unclear. It does appear clear that globular clusters are significantly different from dwarf elliptical galaxies and were formed as part of the star formation of the parent galaxy rather than as a separate galaxy.\n\nThe first known globular cluster, now called M22, was discovered in 1665 by Abraham Ihle, a German amateur astronomer. However, given the small aperture of early telescopes, individual stars within a globular cluster were not resolved until Charles Messier observed M4 in 1764. The first eight globular clusters discovered are shown in the table. Subsequently, Abbé Lacaille would list NGC 104, NGC 4833, M55, M69, and NGC 6397 in his 1751–52 catalogue. The \"M\" before a number refers to Charles Messier's catalogue, while \"NGC\" is from the New General Catalogue by John Dreyer.\n\nWhen William Herschel began his comprehensive survey of the sky using large telescopes in 1782 there were 34 known globular clusters. Herschel discovered another 36 himself and was the first to resolve virtually all of them into stars. He coined the term \"globular cluster\" in his \"Catalogue of a Second Thousand New Nebulae and Clusters of Stars\" published in 1789.\n\nThe number of globular clusters discovered continued to increase, reaching 83 in 1915, 93 in 1930 and 97 by 1947. A total of 152 globular clusters have now been discovered in the Milky Way galaxy, out of an estimated total of 180 ± 20. These additional, undiscovered globular clusters are believed to be hidden behind the gas and dust of the Milky Way.\n\nBeginning in 1914, Harlow Shapley began a series of studies of globular clusters, published in about 40 scientific papers. He examined the RR Lyrae variables in the clusters (which he assumed were cepheid variables) and would use their period–luminosity relationship for distance estimates. Later, it was found that RR Lyrae variables are fainter than Cepheid variables, which caused Shapley to overestimate the distance to the clusters.\nOf the globular clusters within the Milky Way, the majority are found in a halo around the galactic core, and the large majority are located in the celestial sky centered on the core. In 1918, this strongly asymmetrical distribution was used by Harlow Shapley to make a determination of the overall dimensions of the galaxy. By assuming a roughly spherical distribution of globular clusters around the galaxy's center, he used the positions of the clusters to estimate the position of the Sun relative to the galactic center. While his distance estimate was in significant error (although within the same order of magnitude as the currently accepted value), it did demonstrate that the dimensions of the galaxy were much greater than had been previously thought. His error was due to interstellar dust in the Milky Way, which absorbs and diminishes the amount of light from distant objects, such as a globular clusters, that reaches the Earth, thus making them appear to be more distant than they are.\n\nShapley's measurements also indicated that the Sun is relatively far from the center of the galaxy, also contrary to what had previously been inferred from the apparently nearly even distribution of ordinary stars. In reality, most ordinary stars lie within the galaxy's disk and those stars that lie in the direction of the galactic centre and beyond are thus obscured by gas and dust, whereas globular clusters lie outside the disk and can be seen at much further distances.\n\nShapley was subsequently assisted in his studies of clusters by Henrietta Swope and Helen Battles Sawyer (later Hogg). In 1927–29, Harlow Shapley and Helen Sawyer began categorizing clusters according to the degree of concentration the system has toward the core. The most concentrated clusters were identified as Class I, with successively diminishing concentrations ranging to Class XII. This became known as the Shapley–Sawyer Concentration Class (it is sometimes given with numbers [Class 1–12] rather than Roman numerals.) In 2015, a new type of globular cluster was proposed on the basis of observational data, the dark globular clusters.\nThe formation of globular clusters remains a poorly understood phenomenon and it remains uncertain whether the stars in a globular cluster form in a single generation or are spawned across multiple generations over a period of several hundred million years. In many globular clusters, most of the stars are at approximately the same stage in stellar evolution, suggesting that they formed at about the same time. However, the star formation history varies from cluster to cluster, with some clusters showing distinct populations of stars. An example of this is the globular clusters in the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC) that exhibit a bimodal population. During their youth, these LMC clusters may have encountered giant molecular clouds that triggered a second round of star formation. This star-forming period is relatively brief, compared to the age of many globular clusters.\nIt has also been proposed that the reason for this multiplicity in stellar populations could have a dynamical origin. In the Antennae galaxy, for example, the Hubble Space Telescope has observed clusters of clusters, regions in the galaxy that span hundreds of parsecs, where many of the clusters will eventually collide and merge. Many of them present a significant range in ages, hence possibly metallicities, and their merger could plausibly lead to clusters with a bimodal or even multiple distribution of populations. \n\nObservations of globular clusters show that these stellar formations arise primarily in regions of efficient star formation, and where the interstellar medium is at a higher density than in normal star-forming regions. Globular cluster formation is prevalent in starburst regions and in interacting galaxies. Research indicates a correlation between the mass of a central supermassive black holes (SMBH) and the extent of the globular cluster systems of elliptical and lenticular galaxies. The mass of the SMBH in such a galaxy is often close to the combined mass of the galaxy's globular clusters.\n\nNo known globular clusters display active star formation, which is consistent with the view that globular clusters are typically the oldest objects in the Galaxy, and were among the first collections of stars to form. Very large regions of star formation known as super star clusters, such as Westerlund 1 in the Milky Way, may be the precursors of globular clusters.\n\nGlobular clusters are generally composed of hundreds of thousands of low-metal, old stars. The type of stars found in a globular cluster are similar to those in the bulge of a spiral galaxy but confined to a volume of only a few million cubic parsecs. They are free of gas and dust and it is presumed that all of the gas and dust was long ago turned into stars.\n\nGlobular clusters can contain a high density of stars; on average about 0.4 stars per cubic parsec, increasing to 100 or 1000 stars per cubic parsec in the core of the cluster. \nThe typical distance between stars in a globular cluster is about 1 light year, but at its core, the separation is comparable to the size of the Solar System (100 to 1000 times closer than stars near the Solar System).\n\nHowever, they are not thought to be favorable locations for the survival of planetary systems. Planetary orbits are dynamically unstable within the cores of dense clusters because of the perturbations of passing stars. A planet orbiting at 1 astronomical unit around a star that is within the core of a dense cluster such as 47 Tucanae would only survive on the order of 10 years. There is a planetary system orbiting a pulsar (PSR B1620−26) that belongs to the globular cluster M4, but these planets likely formed after the event that created the pulsar.\n\nSome globular clusters, like Omega Centauri in the Milky Way and G1 in M31, are extraordinarily massive, with several million solar masses () and multiple stellar populations. Both can be regarded as evidence that supermassive globular clusters are in fact the cores of dwarf galaxies that are consumed by the larger galaxies. About a quarter of the globular cluster population in the Milky Way may have been accreted along with their host dwarf galaxy.\n\nSeveral globular clusters (like M15) have extremely massive cores which may harbor black holes, although simulations suggest that a less massive black hole or central concentration of neutron stars or massive white dwarfs explain observations equally well.\n\nGlobular clusters normally consist of Population II stars, which have a low proportion of elements other than hydrogen and helium when compared to Population I stars such as the Sun. Astronomers refer to these heavier elements as metals and to the proportions of these elements as the metallicity. These elements are produced by stellar nucleosynthesis and then are recycled into the interstellar medium, where they enter the next generation of stars. Hence the proportion of metals can be an indication of the age of a star, with older stars typically having a lower metallicity.\n\nThe Dutch astronomer Pieter Oosterhoff noticed that there appear to be two populations of globular clusters, which became known as \"Oosterhoff groups\". The second group has a slightly longer period of RR Lyrae variable stars. Both groups have weak lines of metallic elements. But the lines in the stars of Oosterhoff type I (OoI) cluster are not quite as weak as those in type II (OoII). Hence type I are referred to as \"metal-rich\" (e.g. Terzan 7) while type II are \"metal-poor\" (e.g. ESO 280-SC06).\n\nThese two populations have been observed in many galaxies, especially massive elliptical galaxies. Both groups are nearly as old as the universe itself and are of similar ages, but differ in their metal abundances. Many scenarios have been suggested to explain these subpopulations, including violent gas-rich galaxy mergers, the accretion of dwarf galaxies, and multiple phases of star formation in a single galaxy. In the Milky Way, the metal-poor clusters are associated with the halo and the metal-rich clusters with the bulge.\n\nIn the Milky Way it has been discovered that the large majority of the low metallicity clusters are aligned along a plane in the outer part of the galaxy's halo. This result argues in favor of the view that type II clusters in the galaxy were captured from a satellite galaxy, rather than being the oldest members of the Milky Way's globular cluster system as had been previously thought. The difference between the two cluster types would then be explained by a time delay between when the two galaxies formed their cluster systems.\n\nGlobular clusters have a very high star density, and therefore close interactions and near-collisions of stars occur relatively often. Due to these chance encounters, some exotic classes of stars, such as blue stragglers, millisecond pulsars and low-mass X-ray binaries, are much more common in globular clusters. A blue straggler is formed from the merger of two stars, possibly as a result of an encounter with a binary system. The resulting star has a higher temperature than comparable stars in the cluster with the same luminosity, and thus differs from the main sequence stars formed at the beginning of the cluster.\nAstronomers have searched for black holes within globular clusters since the 1970s. The resolution requirements for this task, however, are exacting, and it is only with the Hubble space telescope that the first confirmed discoveries have been made. In independent programs, a intermediate-mass black hole has been suggested to exist based on HST observations in the globular cluster M15 and a black hole in the Mayall II cluster in the Andromeda Galaxy. Both x-ray and radio emissions from Mayall II appear to be consistent with an intermediate-mass black hole.\n\nThese are of particular interest because they are the first black holes discovered that were intermediate in mass between the conventional stellar-mass black hole and the supermassive black holes discovered at the cores of galaxies. The mass of these intermediate mass black holes is proportional to the mass of the clusters, following a pattern previously discovered between supermassive black holes and their surrounding galaxies.\n\nClaims of intermediate mass black holes have been met with some skepticism. The heaviest objects in globular clusters are expected to migrate to the cluster center due to mass segregation. As pointed out in two papers by Holger Baumgardt and collaborators, the mass-to-light ratio should rise sharply towards the center of the cluster, even without a black hole, in both M15 and Mayall II.\n\nThe Hertzsprung-Russell diagram (HR-diagram) is a graph of a large sample of stars that plots their visual\nabsolute magnitude against their color index. The\ncolor index, B−V, is the difference between the magnitude of the star in blue light, or B, and the magnitude in visual light (green-yellow), or V. Large positive values indicate a red star with a cool surface temperature, while negative values imply a blue star with a hotter surface.\n\nWhen the stars near the Sun are plotted on an HR diagram, it displays a distribution of stars of various masses, ages, and compositions. Many of the stars lie relatively close to a sloping curve with increasing absolute magnitude as the stars are hotter, known as main-sequence stars. However the diagram also typically includes stars that are in later stages of their evolution and have wandered away from this main-sequence curve.\n\nAs all the stars of a globular cluster are at approximately the same distance from us, their absolute magnitudes differ from their visual magnitude by about the same amount. The main-sequence stars in the globular cluster will fall along a line that is believed to be comparable to similar stars in the solar neighborhood. The accuracy of this assumption is confirmed by comparable results obtained by comparing the magnitudes of nearby short-period variables, such as RR Lyrae stars and cepheid variables, with those in the cluster.\n\nBy matching up these curves on the HR diagram the absolute magnitude of main-sequence stars in the cluster can also be determined. This in turn provides a distance estimate to the cluster, based on the visual magnitude of the stars. The difference between the relative and absolute magnitude, the \"distance modulus\", yields this estimate of the distance.\n\nWhen the stars of a particular globular cluster are plotted on an HR diagram, in many cases nearly all of the stars fall upon a relatively well defined curve. This differs from the HR diagram of stars near the Sun, which lumps together stars of differing ages and origins. The shape of the curve for a globular cluster is characteristic of a grouping of stars that were formed at approximately the same time and from the same materials, differing only in their initial mass. As the position of each star in the HR diagram varies with age, the shape of the curve for a globular cluster can be used to measure the overall age of the star population.\n\nHowever, the above-mentioned historic process of determining the age and distance to globular clusters is not as robust as first thought, since the morphology and luminosity of globular cluster stars in color-magnitude diagrams are influenced by numerous parameters, many of which are still being actively researched. Certain clusters even display populations that are absent from other globular clusters (e.g., blue hook stars), or feature multiple populations. The historical paradigm that all globular clusters consist of stars born at exactly the same time, or sharing exactly the same chemical abundance, has likewise been overturned (e.g., NGC 2808). Further, the morphology of the cluster stars in a color-magnitude diagram, and that includes the brightnesses of distance indicators such as RR Lyrae variable members, can be influenced by observational biases. One such effect is called blending, and it arises because the cores of globular clusters are so dense that in low-resolution observations multiple (unresolved) stars may appear as a single target. Thus the brightness measured for that seemingly single star (e.g., an RR Lyrae variable) is erroneously too bright, given those unresolved stars contributed to the brightness determined. Consequently, the computed distance is wrong, and more importantly, certain researchers have argued that the blending effect can introduce a systematic uncertainty into the cosmic distance ladder, and may bias the estimated age of the Universe and the Hubble constant.\nThe most massive main-sequence stars will also have the highest absolute magnitude, and these will be the first to evolve into the giant star stage. As the cluster ages, stars of successively lower masses will also enter the giant star stage. Thus the age of a single population cluster can be measured by looking for the stars that are just beginning to enter the giant star stage. This forms a \"knee\" in the HR diagram, bending to the upper right from the main-sequence line. The absolute magnitude at this bend is directly a function of the age of globular cluster, so an age scale can be plotted on an axis parallel to the magnitude.\n\nIn addition, globular clusters can be dated by looking at the temperatures of the coolest white dwarfs. Typical results for globular clusters are that they may be as old as 12.7 billion years. This is in contrast to open clusters which are only tens of millions of years old.\n\nThe ages of globular clusters place a bound on the age limit of the entire universe. This lower limit has been a significant constraint in cosmology. Historically, astronomers were faced with age estimates of globular clusters that appeared older than cosmological models would allow. However, better measurements of cosmological parameters through deep sky surveys and satellites such as the Hubble Space Telescope appear to have resolved this issue.\n\nEvolutionary studies of globular clusters can also be used to determine changes due to the starting composition of the gas and dust that formed the cluster. That is, the evolutionary tracks change with changes in the abundance of heavy elements. The data obtained from studies of globular clusters are then used to study the evolution of the Milky Way as a whole.\n\nIn globular clusters a few stars known as blue stragglers are observed, apparently continuing the main sequence in the direction of brighter, bluer stars. The origins of these stars is still unclear, but most models suggest that these stars are the result of mass transfer in multiple star systems.\n\nIn contrast to open clusters, most globular clusters remain gravitationally bound for time periods comparable to the life spans of the majority of their stars. However, a possible exception is when strong tidal interactions with other large masses result in the dispersal of the stars.\n\nAfter they are formed, the stars in the globular cluster begin to interact gravitationally with each other. As a result, the velocity vectors of the stars are steadily modified, and the stars lose any history of their original velocity. The characteristic interval for this to occur is the relaxation time. This is related to the characteristic length of time a star needs to cross the cluster as well as the number of stellar masses in the system. The value of the relaxation time varies by cluster, but the mean value is on the order of 10 years.\nAlthough globular clusters generally appear spherical in form, ellipticities can occur due to tidal interactions. Clusters within the Milky Way and the Andromeda Galaxy are typically oblate spheroids in shape, while those in the Large Magellanic Cloud are more elliptical.\n\nAstronomers characterize the morphology of a globular cluster by means of standard radii. These are the core radius (\"r\"), the half-light radius (\"r\"), and the tidal (or Jacobi) radius (\"r\"). The overall luminosity of the cluster steadily decreases with distance from the core, and the core radius is the distance at which the apparent surface luminosity has dropped by half. A comparable quantity is the half-light radius, or the distance from the core within which half the total luminosity from the cluster is received. This is typically larger than the core radius.\n\nNote that the half-light radius includes stars in the outer part of the cluster that happen to lie along the line of sight, so theorists will also use the half-mass radius (\"r\")—the radius from the core that contains half the total mass of the cluster. When the half-mass radius of a cluster is small relative to the overall size, it has a dense core. An example of this is Messier 3 (M3), which has an overall visible dimension of about 18 arc minutes, but a half-mass radius of only 1.12 arc minutes.\n\nAlmost all globular clusters have a half-light radius of less than 10 pc, although there are well-established globular clusters with very large radii (i.e. NGC 2419 (R = 18 pc) and Palomar 14 (R = 25 pc)).\n\nFinally the tidal radius, or Hill sphere, is the distance from the center of the globular cluster at which the external gravitation of the galaxy has more influence over the stars in the cluster than does the cluster itself. This is the distance at which the individual stars belonging to a cluster can be separated away by the galaxy. The tidal radius of M3 is about 40 arc minutes, or about 113 pc at the distance of 10.4 kpc.\n\nIn measuring the luminosity curve of a given globular cluster as a function of distance from the core, most clusters in the Milky Way increase steadily in luminosity as this distance decreases, up to a certain distance from the core, then the luminosity levels off. Typically this distance is about 1–2 parsecs from the core. However about 20% of the globular clusters have undergone a process termed \"core collapse\". In this type of cluster, the luminosity continues to increase steadily all the way to the core region. An example of a core-collapsed globular is\nM15.\nCore-collapse is thought to occur when the more massive stars in a globular cluster encounter their less massive companions. Over time, dynamic processes cause individual stars to migrate from the center of the cluster to the outside. This results in a net loss of kinetic energy from the core region, leading the remaining stars grouped in the core region to occupy a more compact volume. When this gravothermal instability occurs, the central region of the cluster becomes densely crowded with stars and the surface brightness of the cluster forms a power-law cusp. (Note that a core collapse is not the only mechanism that can cause such a luminosity distribution; a massive black hole at the core can also result in a luminosity cusp.) Over a lengthy period of time this leads to a concentration of massive stars near the core, a phenomenon called mass segregation.\n\nThe dynamical heating effect of binary star systems works to prevent an initial core collapse of the cluster. When a star passes near a binary system, the orbit of the latter pair tends to contract, releasing energy. Only after the primordial supply of binaries is exhausted due to interactions can a deeper core collapse proceed. In contrast, the effect of tidal shocks as a globular cluster repeatedly passes through the plane of a spiral galaxy tends to significantly accelerate core collapse.\n\nThe different stages of core-collapse may be divided into three phases. During a globular cluster's adolescence, the process of core-collapse begins with stars near the core. However, the interactions between binary star systems prevents further collapse as the cluster approaches middle age. Finally, the central binaries are either disrupted or ejected, resulting in a tighter concentration at the core.\n\nThe interaction of stars in the collapsed core region causes tight binary systems to form. As other stars interact with these tight binaries, they increase the energy at the core, which causes the cluster to re-expand. As the mean time for a core collapse is typically less than the age of the galaxy, many of a galaxy's globular clusters may have passed through a core collapse stage, then re-expanded.\n\nThe Hubble Space Telescope has been used to provide convincing observational evidence of this stellar mass-sorting process in globular clusters. Heavier stars slow down and crowd at the cluster's core, while lighter stars pick up speed and tend to spend more time at the cluster's periphery. The globular star cluster 47 Tucanae, which is made up of about 1 million stars, is one of the densest globular clusters in the Southern Hemisphere. This cluster was subjected to an intensive photographic survey, which allowed astronomers to track the motion of its stars. Precise velocities were obtained for nearly 15,000 stars in this cluster.\n\nA 2008 study by John Fregeau of 13 globular clusters in the Milky Way shows that three of them have an unusually large number of X-ray sources, or X-ray binaries, suggesting the clusters are middle-aged. Previously, these globular clusters had been classified as being in old age because they had very tight concentrations of stars in their centers, another test of age used by astronomers. The implication is that most globular clusters, including the other ten studied by Fregeau, are not in middle age as previously thought, but are actually in 'adolescence'.\n\nThe overall luminosities of the globular clusters within the Milky Way and the Andromeda Galaxy can be modeled by means of a gaussian curve. This gaussian can be represented by means of an average magnitude M and a variance σ. This distribution of globular cluster luminosities is called the Globular Cluster Luminosity Function (GCLF). (For the Milky Way, M = , σ = magnitudes.) The GCLF has also been used as a \"standard candle\" for measuring the distance to other galaxies, under the assumption that the globular clusters in remote galaxies follow the same principles as they do in the Milky Way.\n\nComputing the interactions between the stars within a globular cluster requires solving what is termed the N-body problem. That is, each of the stars within the cluster continually interacts with the other \"N\"−1 stars, where \"N\" is the total number of stars in the cluster. The naive CPU computational \"cost\" for a dynamic simulation increases in proportion to \"N\" (each of N objects must interact pairwise with each of the other N objects), so the potential computing requirements to accurately simulate such a cluster can be enormous. An efficient method of mathematically simulating the N-body dynamics of a globular cluster is done by subdividing into small volumes and velocity ranges, and using probabilities to describe the locations of the stars. The motions are then described by means of a formula called the Fokker–Planck equation. This can be solved by a simplified form of the equation, or by running Monte Carlo simulations and using random values. However the simulation becomes more difficult when the effects of binaries and the interaction with external gravitation forces (such as from the Milky Way galaxy) must also be included.\n\nThe results of N-body simulations have shown that the stars can follow unusual paths through the cluster, often forming loops and often falling more directly toward the core than would a single star orbiting a central mass. In addition, due to interactions with other stars that result in an increase in velocity, some of the stars gain sufficient energy to escape the cluster. Over long periods of time this will result in a dissipation of the cluster, a process termed evaporation. The typical time scale for the evaporation of a globular cluster is 10 years. In 2010 it became possible to directly compute, star by star, N-body simulations of a globular cluster over the course of its lifetime.\n\nBinary stars form a significant portion of the total population of stellar systems, with up to half of all stars occurring in binary systems. Numerical simulations of globular clusters have demonstrated that binaries can hinder and even reverse the process of core collapse in globular clusters. When a star in a cluster has a gravitational encounter with a binary system, a possible result is that the binary becomes more tightly bound and kinetic energy is added to the solitary star. When the massive stars in the cluster are sped up by this process, it reduces the contraction at the core and limits core collapse.\n\nThe ultimate fate of a globular cluster must be either to accrete stars at its core, causing its steady contraction, or gradual shedding of stars from its outer layers.\n\nThe distinction between cluster types is not always\nclear-cut, and objects have been found that blur the\nlines between the categories. For example, BH 176\nin the southern part of the Milky Way has properties\nof both an open and a globular cluster.\n\nIn 2005, astronomers discovered a completely new type of star cluster in the Andromeda Galaxy, which is, in several ways, very similar to globular clusters. The new-found clusters contain hundreds of thousands of stars, a similar number to that found in globular clusters. The clusters share other characteristics with globular clusters such as stellar populations and metallicity. What distinguishes them from the globular clusters is that they are much larger – several hundred light-years across – and hundreds of times less dense. The distances between the stars are, therefore, much greater within the newly discovered extended clusters. Parametrically, these clusters lie somewhere between a globular cluster and a dwarf spheroidal galaxy.\n\nHow these clusters are formed is not yet known, but their formation might well be related to that of globular clusters. Why M31 has such clusters, while the Milky Way does not, is not yet known. It is also unknown if any other galaxy contains these types of clusters, but it would be very unlikely that M31 is the sole galaxy with extended clusters.\n\nWhen a globular cluster has a close encounter with a large mass, such as the core region of a galaxy, it undergoes a tidal interaction. The difference in the pull of gravity between the part of the cluster nearest the mass and the pull on the furthest part of the cluster results in a tidal force. A \"tidal shock\" occurs whenever the orbit of a cluster takes it through the plane of a galaxy.\n\nAs a result of a tidal shock, streams of stars can be pulled away from the cluster halo, leaving only the core part of the cluster. These tidal interaction effects create tails of stars that can extend up to several degrees of arc away from the cluster. These tails typically both precede and follow the cluster along its orbit. The tails can accumulate significant portions of the original mass of the cluster, and can form clumplike features.\n\nThe globular cluster Palomar 5, for example, is near the apogalactic point of its orbit after passing through the Milky Way. Streams of stars extend outward toward the front and rear of the orbital path of this cluster, stretching out to distances of 13,000 light-years. Tidal interactions have stripped away much of the mass from Palomar 5, and further interactions as it passes through the galactic core are expected to transform it into a long stream of stars orbiting the Milky Way halo.\n\nTidal interactions add kinetic energy into a globular cluster, dramatically increasing the evaporation rate and shrinking the size of the cluster. Not only does tidal shock strip off the outer stars from a globular cluster, but the increased evaporation accelerates the process of core collapse. The same physical mechanism may be at work in dwarf spheroidal galaxies such as the Sagittarius Dwarf, which appears to be undergoing tidal disruption due to its proximity to the Milky Way.\n\nThere are many globular clusters with a retrograde orbit round the Milky Way Galaxy. A hypervelocity globular cluster was discovered around Messier 87 in 2014, having a velocity in excess of the escape velocity of M87.\n\nAstronomers are searching for exoplanets of stars in globular star clusters.\n\nIn 2000, the results of a search for giant planets in the globular cluster 47 Tucanae were announced. The lack of any successful discoveries suggests that the abundance of elements (other than hydrogen or helium) necessary to build these planets may need to be at least 40% of the abundance in the Sun. Terrestrial planets are built from heavier elements such as silicon, iron and magnesium. The very low abundance of these elements in globular clusters means that the member stars have a far lower likelihood of hosting Earth-mass planets, when compared to stars in the neighborhood of the Sun. Hence the halo region of the Milky Way galaxy, including globular cluster members, are unlikely to host habitable terrestrial planets.\n\nIn spite of the lower likelihood of giant planet formation, just such an object has been found in the globular cluster Messier 4. This planet was detected orbiting a pulsar in the binary star system PSR B1620-26. The eccentric and highly inclined orbit of the planet suggests it may have been formed around another star in the cluster, then was later \"exchanged\" into its current arrangement. The likelihood of close encounters between stars in a globular cluster can disrupt planetary systems, some of which break loose to become free floating planets. Even close orbiting planets can become disrupted, potentially leading to orbital decay and an increase in orbital eccentricity and tidal effects.\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "12866", "title": "Globular cluster"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12867", "text": "George Vancouver\n\nCaptain George Vancouver (22 June 1757 – 10 May 1798) was an English officer of the Royal Navy, best known for his 1791–95 expedition, which explored and charted North America's northwestern Pacific Coast regions, including the coasts of contemporary Alaska, British Columbia, Washington and Oregon. He also explored the Hawaiian Islands and the southwest coast of Australia.\n\nIn Canada, Vancouver Island and the city Vancouver are named after him, as are Vancouver, Washington in the United States, Mount Vancouver on the Yukon/Alaska border and New Zealand's sixth highest mountain.\n\nGeorge Vancouver was born in King's Lynn on 22 June 1757 as the sixth, and youngest, child of John Jasper Vancouver, a Deputy Collector of Customs, and Bridget Berners.\n\nIn 1771, at the age of 13, George Vancouver entered the Royal Navy as a \"young gentleman\", a future candidate for midshipman. He was selected to serve as a midshipman aboard , on James Cook's second voyage (1772–1775) searching for \"Terra Australis\". He also accompanied Cook's third voyage (1776–1780), this time aboard \"Resolution\"'s sister ship, , and was present during the first European sighting and exploration of the Hawaiian Islands. Upon his return to Britain in October 1780, Vancouver was commissioned as a lieutenant and posted aboard the sloop initially on escort and patrol duty in the English Channel and North Sea. He accompanied the ship when it left Plymouth on 11 February 1782 for the West Indies. On 7 May 1782 he was appointed fourth Lieutenant of the HMS \"Fame\" which was at the time part of the British West Indies Fleet and assigned to patrolling the French-held Leeward Islands. Vancouver returned to England in June 1783.\n\nIn the late 1780s the Spanish empire commissioned an expedition to the Pacific Northwest. However, the 1789 Nootka Crisis intervened. Spain and Britain came close to war over ownership of the Nootka Sound on contemporary Vancouver Island, and of greater importance, the right to colonize and settle the Pacific Northwest coast. Henry Roberts and Vancouver joined Britain's more warlike vessels. Vancouver went with Joseph Whidbey to . When the first Nootka Convention ended the crisis in 1790, Vancouver was given command of \"Discovery\" to take possession of Nootka Sound and to survey the coasts.\n\nDeparting England with two ships on 1 April 1791, Vancouver commanded an expedition charged with exploring the Pacific region. In its first year the expedition travelled to Cape Town, Australia, New Zealand, Tahiti, and Hawaii, collecting botanical samples and surveying coastlines along the way. He formally claimed at Possession Point, King George Sound Western Australia, now the town of Albany, Western Australia for the British. Proceeding to North America, Vancouver followed the coasts of present-day Oregon and Washington northward. In April 1792 he encountered American Captain Robert Gray off the coast of Oregon just prior to Gray's sailing up the Columbia River.\n\nVancouver entered the Strait of Juan de Fuca, between Vancouver Island and the Washington state mainland on 29 April 1792. His orders included a survey of every inlet and outlet on the west coast of the mainland, all the way north to Alaska. Most of this work was in small craft propelled by both sail and oar; maneuvering larger sail-powered vessels in uncharted waters was generally impractical and dangerous.\n\nVancouver named many features after friends and associates, including:\n\nVancouver was the second European to enter Burrard Inlet on 13 June 1792, naming it after his friend Sir Harry Burrard. It is the present day main harbour area of the City of Vancouver beyond Stanley Park. George Vancouver surveyed Howe Sound and Jervis Inlet over the next nine days. Then, on his 35th birthday on 22 June 1792, he returned to Point Grey, the present day location of the University of British Columbia. Here he unexpectedly met a Spanish expedition led by Dionisio Alcalá Galiano and Cayetano Valdés y Flores. Vancouver was \"\"mortified\"\" (\"his word\") to learn they already had a crude chart of the Strait of Georgia based on the 1791 exploratory voyage of José María Narváez the year before, under command of Francisco de Eliza. For three weeks they cooperatively explored the Georgia Strait and the Discovery Islands area before sailing separately towards Nootka Sound.\n\nAfter the summer surveying season ended, in August 1792, Vancouver went to Nootka, then the region's most important harbour, on contemporary Vancouver Island. Here he was to receive any British buildings and lands returned by the Spanish from claims by Francisco de Eliza for the Spanish crown. The Spanish commander, Juan Francisco Bodega y Quadra, was very cordial and he and Vancouver exchanged the maps they had made, but no agreement was reached; they decided to await further instructions. At this time, they decided to name the large island on which Nootka was now proven to be located as \"Quadra and Vancouver Island\". Years later, as Spanish influence declined, the name was shortened to simply Vancouver Island.\n\nWhile at Nootka Sound Vancouver acquired Robert Gray's chart of the lower Columbia River. Gray had entered the river during the summer before sailing to Nootka Sound for repairs. Vancouver realized the importance of verifying Gray's information and conducting a more thorough survey. In October 1792, he sent Lieutenant William Robert Broughton with several boats up the Columbia River. Broughton got as far as the Columbia River Gorge, sighting and naming Mount Hood.\n\nVancouver sailed south along the coast of Spanish Alta California, visiting Chumash villages at Point Conception and near Mission San Buenaventura. Vancouver spent the winter in continuing exploration of the Sandwich Islands, the contemporary islands of Hawaii.\n\nThe next year, 1793, he returned to British Columbia and proceeded further north, unknowingly missing the overland explorer Alexander Mackenzie by only 48 days. He got to 56°30'N, having explored north from Point Menzies in Burke Channel to the northwest coast of Prince of Wales Island. He sailed around the latter island, as well as circumnavigating Revillagigedo Island and charting parts of the coasts of Mitkof, Zarembo, Etolin, Wrangell, Kuiu and Kupreanof Islands. With worsening weather, he sailed south to Alta California, hoping to find Bodega y Quadra and fulfil his territorial mission, but the Spaniard was not there. He again spent the winter in the Sandwich Islands.\n\nIn 1794, he first went to Cook Inlet, the northernmost point of his exploration, and from there followed the coast south. Boat parties charted the east coasts of Chichagof and Baranof Islands, circumnavigated Admiralty Island, explored to the head of Lynn Canal, and charted the rest of Kuiu Island and nearly all of Kupreanof Island. He then set sail for Great Britain by way of Cape Horn, returning in September 1795, thus completing a circumnavigation of South America.\n\nImpressed by the view from Richmond Hill, Vancouver retired to Petersham, London.\n\nVancouver faced difficulties when he returned home to England. The accomplished and politically well-connected naturalist Archibald Menzies complained that his servant had been pressed into service during a shipboard emergency; sailing master Joseph Whidbey had a competing claim for pay as expedition astronomer; and Thomas Pitt, 2nd Baron Camelford, whom Vancouver had disciplined for numerous infractions and eventually sent home in disgrace, proceeded to harass him publicly and privately.\n\nPitt's allies, including his cousin, Prime Minister William Pitt the Younger, attacked Vancouver in the press. Thomas Pitt took a more direct approach; on 29 August 1796 he sent Vancouver a letter heaping many insults on the head of his former captain, and challenging him to a duel. Vancouver gravely replied that he was unable \"in a private capacity to answer for his public conduct in his official duty,\" and offered instead to submit to formal examination by flag officers. Pitt chose instead to stalk Vancouver, ultimately assaulting him on a London street corner. The terms of their subsequent legal dispute required both parties to keep the peace, but nothing stopped Vancouver's civilian brother Charles from interposing and giving Pitt blow after blow until onlookers restrained the attacker. Charges and counter-charges flew in the press, with the wealthy Camelford faction having the greater firepower until Vancouver, ailing from his long naval service, died.\n\nVancouver, one of Britain's greatest explorers and navigators, died in obscurity on 10 May 1798 at the age of 40, less than three years after completing his voyages and expeditions. No official cause of death was stated, as the medical records pertaining to Vancouver were destroyed; one doctor named John Naish claimed Vancouver died from kidney failure, while others believed it was a hyperthyroid condition. His grave is in the churchyard of St Peter's Church, Petersham, in the London Borough of Richmond upon Thames, England. The Hudson's Bay Company placed a memorial plaque in the church in 1841. His grave in Portland stone, renovated in the 1960s, is now Grade II listed in view of its historical associations.\n\nVancouver determined that the Northwest Passage did not exist at the latitudes that had long been suggested. His charts of the North American northwest coast were so extremely accurate that they served as the key reference for coastal navigation for generations. Robin Fisher, the academic Vice President of Mount Royal University in Calgary and author of two books on Vancouver, states:\nHowever, Vancouver failed to discover two of the largest and most important rivers on the Pacific coast, the Fraser River and the Columbia River. He also missed the Skeena River near Prince Rupert in northern British Columbia. Vancouver did eventually learn of the river before he finished his survey—from Robert Gray, captain of the American merchant ship that conducted the first Euroamerican sailing of the Columbia River on 11 May 1792, after first sighting it on an earlier voyage in 1788. However it and the Fraser River never made it onto Vancouver's charts.\nStephen R. Bown, noted in \"Mercator's World\" magazine (November/December 1999) that:\n\nWhile it is difficult to comprehend how Vancouver missed the Fraser River, much of this river's delta was subject to flooding and summer freshet which prevented the captain from spotting any of its great channels as he sailed the entire shoreline from Point Roberts, Washington to Point Grey in 1792. The Spanish expeditions to the Pacific Northwest, with the 1791 Francisco de Eliza expedition preceding Vancouver by a year, had also missed the Fraser River although they knew from its muddy plume that there was a major river located nearby.\n\nVancouver generally established a good rapport with both Indigenous peoples and European trappers. Historical records show Vancouver enjoyed good relations with native leaders both in Hawaii – where King Kamehameha I ceded Hawaii to Vancouver in 1794 – as well as the Pacific Northwest and California. Vancouver's journals exhibit a high degree of sensitivity to natives. He wrote of meeting the Chumash people, and of his exploration of a small island on the Alaskan coast on which an important burial site was marked by a sepulchre of \"peculiar character\" lined with boards and fragments of military instruments lying near a square box covered with mats. Vancouver states:\n\nVancouver also displayed contempt in his journals towards unscrupulous western traders who provided guns to natives by writing:\n\nRobin Fisher notes that Vancouver's \"relationships with aboriginal groups were generally peaceful; indeed, his detailed survey would not have been possible if they had been hostile.\" While there were hostile incidents at the end of Vancouver's last season – the most serious of which involved a clash with Tlingits at Behm Canal in southeast Alaska in 1794 – these were the exceptions to Vancouver's exploration of the U.S. and Canadian Northwest coast.\n\nDespite a long history of warfare between Britain and Spain, Vancouver maintained excellent relations with his Spanish counterparts and even fêted a Spanish sea captain aboard his ship during his 1792 trip to the Vancouver region.\n\n\nMany places around the world have been named after George Vancouver, including:\n\n\n\n\n\n\nMany collections were made on the voyage: one was donated by Archibald Menzies to the British Museum 1796; another made by surgeon George Goodman Hewett (1765–1834) was donated by A. W. Franks to the British Museum in 1891. An account of these has been published.\n\n Canada Post issued a $1.55 postage stamp to commemorate the 250th anniversary of Vancouver's birth, on 22 June 2007. The stamp has an embossed image of Vancouver seen from behind as he gazes forward towards a mountainous coastline. This may be the first Canadian stamp not to show the subject's face.\n\nThe City of Vancouver in Canada organized a celebration to commemorate the 250th anniversary of Vancouver's birth, in June 2007 at the Vancouver Maritime Museum. The one-hour festivities included the presentation of a massive 63 by 114 centimetre carrot cake, the firing of a gun salute by the Royal Canadian Artillery's 15th Field Regiment and a performance by the Vancouver Firefighter's Band.\nVancouver's then-mayor, Sam Sullivan, officially declared 22 June 2007 to be \"George Day\".\n\nThe Musqueam native elder Larry Grant attended the festivities and acknowledged that some of his people might disapprove of his presence, but also noted:\n\nThere has been some debate about the origins of the Vancouver name. It is now commonly accepted that the name Vancouver derives from the expression van Coevorden, meaning \"(originating) from Coevorden\", a city in the northeast of the Netherlands. This city is apparently named after the \"Coeverden\" family of the 13th–15th century.\n\nIn the 16th century, a number of businessmen from the Coevorden area (and the rest of the Netherlands) moved to England. Some of them were known as \"Van Coeverden\". Others adopted the surname Oxford, as in oxen fording (a river), which is approximately the English translation of \"Coevorden\". However, it is not the exact name of the noble family mentioned in the history books that claim Vancouver's noble lineage: that name was Coeverden not Coevorden.\n\nIn the 1970s, Adrien Mansvelt, a former Consul General of the Netherlands based in Vancouver, published a collation of information in both historical and genealogical journals and in the \"Vancouver Sun\" newspaper. Mansvelt's theory was later presented by the city during the Expo 86 World's Fair, as historical fact. The information was then used by historian W. Kaye Lamb in his book \"A Voyage of Discovery to the North Pacific Ocean and Round the World, 1791–1795\" (1984).\n\nW. Kaye Lamb, in summarising Mansvelt's 1973 research, observes evidence of close family ties between the Vancouver family of Britain and the Van Coeverden family of the Netherlands as well as George Vancouver's own words from his diaries in referring to his Dutch ancestry:\n\nIn 2006 John Robson, a librarian at the University of Waikato, conducted his own research into George Vancouver's ancestry, which he published in an article published in the British Columbia History journal. Robson theorizes that Vancouver's forebears may have been Flemish rather than Dutch; he believes that Vancouver is descended from the Vangover family of Ipswich and Colchester in Suffolk. Those towns had a significant Flemish population in the 16th and 17th centuries.\n\nGeorge Vancouver named the south point of what is now Couverden Island, Alaska, as \"Point Couverden\" during his exploration of the North American Pacific coast, in honour of his family's hometown of Coevorden. It is located at the western point of entry to Lynn Canal in southeastern Alaska.\n\nThe Admiralty instructed Vancouver to publish a narrative of his voyage which he started to write in early 1796 in Petersham. At the time of his death the manuscript covered the period up to mid-1795. The work, \"A Voyage of Discovery to the North Pacific Ocean, and Round the World\", was completed by his brother John and published in three volumes in the autumn of 1798. A second edition was published in 1801 in six volumes. \n\nA modern annotated edition (1984) by W. Kaye Lamb was renamed \"The Voyage of George Vancouver 1791–1795\", and published in four volumes by the Hakluyt Society of London, England.\n\n\n\n", "id": "12867", "title": "George Vancouver"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12872", "text": "Great Vowel Shift\n\nThe Great Vowel Shift was a major change in the pronunciation of the English language that took place in England between 1350 and 1600. Through the Great Vowel Shift, all Middle English long vowels changed their pronunciation. English spelling was becoming standardized in the 15th and 16th centuries, and the Great Vowel Shift is responsible for many of the peculiarities of English spelling.\n\nThe Great Vowel Shift was first studied by Otto Jespersen (1860–1943), a Danish linguist and Anglicist, who coined the term.\n\nThe main difference between the pronunciation of Middle English in the year 1400 and Modern English (Received Pronunciation) is in the value of the long vowels. Long vowels in Middle English had \"continental\" values, much like those in Italian and Standard German, but in standard Modern English, they have entirely different pronunciations. The change in pronunciation is known as the Great Vowel Shift.\n\nThis timeline shows the main vowel changes that occurred between late Middle English in the year 1400 and Received Pronunciation in the mid-20th century by using representative words. The Great Vowel Shift occurred in the lower half of the table, between 1400 and 1600. The changes that happened after 1600 are not usually considered part of the Great Vowel Shift proper. Pronunciation is given in the International Phonetic Alphabet:\n\nBefore the Great Vowel Shift, Middle English in Southern England had seven long vowels, . The vowels occurred in the words \"bite\", \"meet\", \"meat\", \"mate\", \"boat\", \"boot\" and \"out\".\n\nThe words had very different pronunciations in Middle English from their pronunciations in Modern English. Long \"i\" in \"bite\" was pronounced as so Middle English \"bite\" sounded like Modern English \"beet\" ; long \"e\" in \"meet\" was pronounced as so Middle English \"meet\" sounded similar to Modern English \"mate\" ; long \"a\" in \"mate\" was pronounced as , with a vowel like Modern English \"ah\" in \"father\" ; and long \"o\" in \"boot\" was pronounced as , similar to modern \"oa\" in American English \"boat\" . In addition, Middle English had a long in \"beat\", like modern short \"e\" in \"bed\" but pronounced longer, and a long in \"boat\", like the vowel of \"law\" in British English.\n\nAfter around 1300, the long vowels of Middle English began changing in pronunciation. The two close vowels, , became diphthongs (vowel breaking), and the other five, , underwent an increase in tongue height (raising).\n\nThe changes are known as the Great Vowel Shift. They occurred over several centuries and can be divided into two phases. The first phase affected the close vowels and the close-mid vowels : were raised to , and became the diphthongs or . The second phase affected the open vowel and the open-mid vowels : were raised, in most cases changing to .\n\nThe Great Vowel Shift changed vowels without merger so Middle English before the vowel shift had the same number of vowel phonemes as Early Modern English after the vowel shift. After the Great Vowel Shift, some vowel phonemes began merging. Immediately after the Great Vowel Shift, the vowels of \"meet\" and \"meat\" were different, but they are merged in Modern English, and both words are pronounced as . However, during the 16th and the 17th centuries, there were many different mergers, and some mergers can be seen in individual Modern English words like \"great\", which is pronounced with the vowel as in \"mate\" rather than the vowel as in \"meat\".\n\nThis is a simplified picture of the changes that happened between late Middle English and today's English. Pronunciations in 1400, 1500, 1600.and 2000 are shown. To hear recordings of the sounds, click the phonetic symbols.\n\nBefore labial consonants, did not shift, and remains as in \"soup\" and \"room\" (its Middle English spelling was \"roum\").\n\nThe first phase of the Great Vowel Shift affected the Middle English close-mid vowels , as in \"beet\" and \"boot\", and the close vowels , as in \"bite\" and \"out\". The close-mid vowels became close , and the close vowels became diphthongs. The first phase was complete in 1500, meaning that by that time, words like \"beet\" and \"boot\" had lost their Middle English pronunciation, and were pronounced with the same vowels as in Modern English. The words \"bite\" and \"out\" were pronounced with diphthongs, but not the same diphthongs as in Modern English.\nScholars agree that the Middle English close vowels became diphthongs around the year 1500, but disagree about what diphthongs they changed to. According to Lass, the words \"bite\" and \"out\" after diphthongization were pronounced as and , similar to American English \"bait\" and \"oat\" . Later, the diphthongs shifted to , then , and finally to Modern English . This sequence of events is supported by the testimony of orthoepists before Hodges in 1644.\n\nHowever, many scholars such as , , and argue for theoretical reasons that, contrary to what 16th-century witnesses report, the vowels were actually immediately centralized and lowered to .\n\nEvidence from northern English and Scots (see below) suggests that the close-mid vowels were the first to shift. As the Middle English vowels were raised towards , they forced the original Middle English out of place and caused them to become diphthongs . This type of sound change, in which one vowel's pronunciation shifts so that it is pronounced like a second vowel, and the second vowel is forced to change its pronunciation, is called a push chain.\n\nHowever, according to professor Jürgen Handke, for some time, there was a phonetic split between words with the vowel and the diphthong , in words where the Middle English shifted to the Modern English . For an example, \"high\" was pronounced with the vowel , and \"like\" and \"my\" were pronounced with the diphthong . Therefore, for logical reasons, the close vowels could have diphthongized before the close-mid vowels raised. Otherwise, \"high\" would probably rhyme with \"thee\" rather than \"my\". This type of chain is called a drag chain.\n\nThe second phase of the Great Vowel Shift affected the Middle English open vowel , as in \"mate\", and the Middle English open-mid vowels , as in \"meat\" and \"boat\". Around 1550, Middle English was raised to . Then, after 1600, the new was raised to , with the Middle English open-mid vowels raised to close-mid . \nDuring the first and the second phases of the Great Vowel Shift, long vowels were shifted without merging with other vowels, but after the second phase, several vowels merged. The later changes also involved the Middle English diphthong , as in \"day\", which had monophthongised to , and merged with Middle English as in \"mate\" or as in \"meat\".\n\nDuring the 16th and 17th centuries, several different pronunciation variants existed among different parts of the population for words like \"meet\", \"meat\", \"mate\", and \"day\". In each pronunciation variant, different pairs or trios of words were merged in pronunciation. Four different pronunciation variants are shown in the table below. The fourth pronunciation variant gave rise to Modern English pronunciation. In Modern English, \"meet\" and \"meat\" are merged in pronunciation and both have the vowel , and \"mate\" and \"day\" are merged with the diphthong , which developed from the 16th-century long vowel .\nModern English typically has the \"meet\"–\"meat\" merger: both \"meet\" and \"meat\" are pronounced with the vowel . Words like \"great\" and \"steak\", however, have merged with \"mate\" and are pronounced with the vowel , which developed from the shown in the table above.\n\nThe Great Vowel Shift affected other dialects as well as the standard English of southern England but in different ways. In Northern England, the long back vowels remained unaffected because the long mid back vowel had undergone an earlier shift. Similarly, the Scots language in Scotland had a different vowel system before the Great Vowel Shift, as had shifted to in Early Scots. In the Scots equivalent of the Great Vowel Shift, the long vowels , and shifted to , and by the Middle Scots period and remained unaffected.\n\nThe first step in the Great Vowel Shift in Northern and Southern English is shown in the table below. The Northern English developments of Middle English and were different from Southern English. In particular, the Northern English vowels in \"bite\", in \"feet\", and in \"boot\" shifted, while the vowel in \"house\" did not:\nThe vowel systems of Northern and Southern Middle English immediately before the Great Vowel Shift were different in one way. In Northern Middle English, the back close-mid vowel in \"boot\" had already shifted to front (a sound change known as fronting), like the long \"\" in German \"hear\". Thus, Southern English had a back close-mid vowel , but Northern English did not:\n\nIn both Northern and Southern English, the first step of the Great Vowel Shift raised the close-mid vowels to become close. Northern Middle English had two close-mid vowels – in \"feet\" and in \"boot\" – which were raised to and . Later on, Northern English changed to , so that \"boot\" has the same vowel as \"feet\". Southern Middle English had two close-mid vowels – in \"feet\" and in \"boot\" – which were raised to and .\n\nIn Southern English, the close vowels in \"bite\" and in \"house\" shifted to become diphthongs, but in Northern English, in \"bite\" shifted and in \"house\" did not.\n\nIf the difference between the Northern and Southern vowel shifts is caused by the vowel systems at the time of the Great Vowel Shift, did not shift because there was no the back mid vowel in Northern English. In Southern English, shifting of to could have caused diphthongisation of original , but because Northern English had no back close-mid vowel to shift, the back close vowel did not diphthongise.\n\nNot all words underwent certain phases of the Great Vowel Shift. Examples are \"father\", which failed to become , and \"broad\", which failed to become . The word \"room\", which was spelled as \"roum\" in Middle English, retains its Middle English pronunciation. It is an exception to the shifting of to because it is followed by \"m\", a labial consonant.\n\nThe class \"ea\" did not take the step to in several words. The presence of in \"swear\" and \"bear\" caused the vowel quality to be retained but not in the cases of \"hear\" and \"near\".\nShortening of long vowels at various stages produced further complications: \"ea\" is again a good example by shortening commonly before coronal consonants such as \"d\" and \"th\", thus: \"dead\", \"head\", \"threat\", \"wealth\" etc. (That is known as the bred–bread merger.) The \"oo\" was shortened from to , in many cases before \"k\", \"d\" and less commonly \"t\": \"book\", \"foot\", \"good\", etc. Some words subsequently changed from to : \"blood\", \"flood\". Similar but older shortening occurred for some instances of \"ou\": \"could\".\n\nSome loanwords, such as \"soufflé\" and \"Umlaut\", have retained a spelling from their origin language that may seem similar to the previous examples; but, since they were not a part of English at the time of the Great Vowel Shift, they are not actually exceptions to the shift.\n\nThe printing press was introduced to England in the 1470s by William Caxton and later Richard Pynson. The adoption and use of the printing press accelerated the process of standardization of English spelling, which continued into the 16th century. The standard spellings were those of Middle English pronunciation, and spelling conventions continued from Old English. However, the Middle English spellings were retained into Modern English while the Great Vowel Shift was taking place, which caused some of the peculiarities of Modern English spelling in relation to vowels.\n\n\n", "id": "12872", "title": "Great Vowel Shift"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12874", "text": "Gilbert Arthur à Beckett\n\nGilbert Arthur à Beckett (1837 – October 15, 1891) was an English writer.\n\nBeckett was born at Portland House Hammersmith, on 7 April 1837, the eldest son of the civil servant and humorist Gilbert Abbott à Beckett and the composer Mary Anne à Beckett, daughter of Joseph Glossop, clerk of the cheque to the hon. corps of gentlemen-at-arms.\nHis brother was Arthur William à Beckett. \nHe graduated from Christ Church, Oxford, as a Westminster scholar in 1860.\nHe was entered at Lincoln's Inn on 15 October 1857, but gave his attention chiefly to drama, producing \"Diamonds and Hearts\" at the Haymarket Theatre in 1867; this was followed by other light comedies. \nHis adaptation of a French operetta by Émile Jonas called \"The Two Harlequins\" opened the new Gaiety Theatre, London in 1868, together with his distant cousin, W. S. Gilbert's, \"Robert the Devil\" and another piece.\n\nBeckett's pieces include numerous burlesques and pantomimes, the libretti of \"Savonarola\" (Hamburg, 1884) and \"The Canterbury Pilgrims\" (Drury Lane, 1884) for the music of Dr. C. V. Stanford.\nWith the composer Alfred Cellier, Beckett wrote the operetta \"Two Foster Brothers\" (St. George's Hall, 1877).\n\nIn 1879, he had been asked by Tom Taylor, the editor of \"Punch\", to follow the example of his younger brother Arthur, and become a regular member of the staff of \"Punch.\" \nThree years later he was 'appointed to the Table.' \nThe \"Punch\" dinners 'were his greatest pleasure, and he attended them with regularity, although the paralysis of the legs, the result of falling down the stairway of Gower Street station, rendered his locomotion, and especially the mounting of Mr. Punch's staircase, a matter of painful exertion'. \nTo \"Punch\" he contributed both prose and verse; he wrote, in greater part, the admirable parody of a boy's sensational shocker (March 1882), and he developed Jerrold's idea of humorous bogus advertisements under the heading 'How we advertise now.' \nThe idea of one of Sir John Tenniel's best cartoons for \"Punch,\" entitled 'Dropping the Pilot,' illustrative of Bismarck's resignation in 1889, was due to him.\n\nApart from his work on 'Punch,' he wrote songs and music for the German Reeds' entertainment, while in 1873 and 1874 he was collaborator in two dramatic productions which evoked a considerable amount of public attention.\nOn 3 March 1873, \"The Happy Land\" was given at the Court Theatre, 1873, a daring political satire and burlesque of W. S. Gilbert's \"The Wicked World\". \nIn this amusing piece of banter three statesmen (Gladstone, Lowe, and Ayrton) were represented as visiting Fairyland in order to impart to the inhabitants the secrets of popular government. The actors representing 'Mr. G.,' 'Mr. L.,' and 'Mr. A.' were dressed so as to resemble the ministers satirised, and the representation elicited a question in the House of Commons and an official visit of the Lord Chamberlain to the theatre, with the result that the actors had to change their 'make-up.'\n\nIn the following year, he furnished the 'legend' to Herman Merivale's tragedy 'The White Pilgrim,' first given at the Court in February 1874. \nAt the close of his life he furnished the 'lyrics' and most of the book for the operetta 'La Cigale,' which at the time of his death was nearing its four hundredth performance at the Lyric Theatre.\n\nIn 1889, he suffered a great shock from the death by drowning of his only son, and he died in London on 15 October 1891, and was buried in Mortlake cemetery.\n\n\"Punch\" devoted some appreciative stanzas to his memory, bearing the epigraph 'Wearing the white flower of a blameless life' (24 Oct. 1891). His portrait appeared in the well-known drawing of 'The Mahogany Tree' (\"Punch\", Jubilee Number, 18 July 1887), and likenesses were also given in the 'Illustrated London News' and in Spielmann's 'History of Punch' (1895). \nHe married Emily, eldest daughter of William Hunt, J.P., of Bath, and his only daughter Minna married in 1896 Mr. Hugh Clifford, C.M.G., governor of Labuan and British North Borneo.\n\n", "id": "12874", "title": "Gilbert Arthur à Beckett"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12875", "text": "Glaucus (disambiguation)\n\nGlaucus (; , \"greyish blue\" or \"bluish green\" and \"glimmering\") is a Greek name. In modern Greek usage, the name is usually transliterated \"Glafkos\". It may refer to:\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "12875", "title": "Glaucus (disambiguation)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12878", "text": "George Gordon, 1st Earl of Aberdeen\n\nGeorge Gordon, 1st Earl of Aberdeen (3 October 163720 April 1720), was a Lord Chancellor of Scotland.\n\nGordon, born on 3 October 1637, the second son of Sir John Gordon, 1st Baronet, of Haddo, Aberdeenshire, (executed in 1644);\n\nAt the Restoration the sequestration of his father's lands was annulled, and in 1665 he succeeded by the death of his elder brother as the 3rd Baronet Gordon, of Haddo and to the family estates. He returned home in 1667, was admitted advocate in 1668 and gained a high legal reputation. He represented Aberdeenshire in the Parliament of Scotland of 1669 and in the following assemblies, during his first session strongly opposing the projected union of the two legislatures. In November 1678 he was made a Privy Counsellor for Scotland, and in 1680 was raised to the bench as Lord Haddo. He was a leading member of the Duke of York's administration, was created a Lord of the Articles in June and in November 1681 Lord President of the Privy Council. The same year he is reported as moving in the council for the torture of witnesses.\n\nIn 1682 he was made Lord Chancellor of Scotland, and was created, on 13 November, Earl of Aberdeen, Viscount Formartine, and Lord Haddo, Methlick, Tarves and Kellie, in the Scottish peerage, being appointed also Sheriff Principal of Aberdeenshire and Midlothian.\n\nBurnet reflected unfavourably upon him:\nHe executed the laws enforcing religious conformity with severity, and filled the parish churches, but resisted the excessive measures of tyranny prescribed by the English government; and in consequence of an intrigue of the Duke of Queensberry and Lord Perth, who gained the duchess of Portsmouth with a present of £27,000, he was dismissed in 1684.\n\nAfter his fall he was subjected to various petty prosecutions by his victorious rivals with the view of discovering some act of maladministration on which to found a charge against him, but the investigations only served to strengthen his credit. He took an active part in parliament in 1685 and 1686, but remained a non-juror during the whole of William's reign, being frequently fined for his non-attendance, and took the oaths for the first time after Anne's accession, on 11 May 1703.\n\nIn the great affair of the Union in 1707, while protesting against the completion of the treaty till the act declaring the Scots aliens should be repealed, he refused to support the opposition to the measure itself and refrained from attending parliament when the treaty was settled.\n\nHe is described by John Mackay as \nHis person was said to be deformed, and his \"want of mine or deportment\" was alleged as a disqualification for the office of Lord Chancellor.\n\nHe married Anne Lockhart, daughter and (eventual) sole heiress of George Lockhart of Tarbrax and Anne Lockhart. They had several children:\n\nHis only surviving son, William, succeeded him as 2nd earl of Aberdeen. He died on 20 April 1720, having amassed a large fortune.\n\nAttribution\n\n \n", "id": "12878", "title": "George Gordon, 1st Earl of Aberdeen"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12879", "text": "George Hamilton-Gordon, 4th Earl of Aberdeen\n\nGeorge Hamilton-Gordon, 4th Earl of Aberdeen, (28 January 178414 December 1860), styled Lord Haddo from 1791 to 1801, was a British politician, diplomat and landowner, successively a Tory, Conservative and Peelite, who served as Prime Minister from 1852 until 1855 in a coalition between the Whigs and Peelites, with Radical and Irish support. The Aberdeen ministry was filled with powerful and talented politicians, whom Aberdeen was largely unable to control and direct. Despite trying to avoid this happening, it took Britain into the Crimean War, and fell when its conduct became unpopular, after which Aberdeen retired from politics.\n\nAberdeen's career was dominated by foreign policy, but his experience did not prevent the slide towards the Crimean War. His personal life was marked by the loss of both parents by the time he was eleven, and of his first wife after only seven years of a happy marriage. His daughters died young, and his relations with his sons were difficult. Before his marriage he travelled extensively in Europe, including Greece, and he had a serious interest in the classical civilisations and their archaeology. On his return to Britain in 1805 he devoted much time and energy to improving conditions on his Scottish estates.\n\nAfter the death of his wife in 1812 he became a diplomat, almost immediately being given the important embassy to Vienna while still in his twenties. His rise in politics was equally rapid and lucky, and \"two accidents — Canning's death and Wellington's impulsive acceptance of the Canningite resignations\" led to him becoming Foreign Secretary to the Duke of Wellington in 1828 despite \"an almost ludicrous lack of official experience\"; he had been a minister for less than six months. After holding the position for two years, followed by another cabinet role, by 1841 his experience led to his appointment as Foreign Secretary again under Robert Peel for a longer term. This was despite his being a \"notoriously bad speaker\", which mattered far less in the House of Lords, and having a \"dour, awkward, occasionally sarcastic exterior\". Nonetheless his Peelite colleague, later himself Prime Minister, William Ewart Gladstone, said of him that he was \"the man in public life of all others whom I have \"loved\". I say emphatically \"loved\". I have \"loved\" others, but never like him\".\n\nBorn in Edinburgh on 28 January 1784, he was the eldest son of George Gordon, Lord Haddo, son of George Gordon, 3rd Earl of Aberdeen. His mother was Charlotte, youngest daughter of William Baird of Newbyth. He lost his father in 1791 and his mother in 1795 and was brought up by Henry Dundas, 1st Viscount Melville and William Pitt the Younger. He was educated at Harrow, and St John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated with a Master of Arts in 1804. Before this, however, he had become Earl of Aberdeen on his grandfather's death in 1801, and had travelled all over Europe. On his return to England, he founded the Athenian Society. In 1805, he married Lady Catherine Elizabeth, daughter of John Hamilton, 1st Marquess of Abercorn.\n\nIn December 1805 Lord Aberdeen took his seat as a Tory Scottish representative peer in the House of Lords. In 1808, he was created a Knight of the Thistle. Following the death of his wife from tuberculosis in 1812 he joined the Foreign Service. He was appointed Ambassador Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to Austria, and signed the Treaty of Töplitz between Britain and Austria in Vienna in October 1813. In the company of the Austrian Emperor, Francis II he was an observer at the decisive Coalition victory of the Battle of Leipzig in October 1813; he had met Napoleon in his earlier travels. He became one of the central diplomatic figures in European diplomacy at this time, and he was one of the British representatives at the Congress of Châtillon in February 1814, and at the negotiations which led to the Treaty of Paris in May of that year.\n\nAberdeen was greatly affected by the aftermath of war which he witnessed at first hand. He wrote home:\n\nThe near approach of war and its effects are horrible beyond what you can conceive. The whole road from Prague to [Teplitz] was covered with waggons full of wounded, dead, and dying. The shock and disgust and pity produced by such scenes are beyond what I could have supposed possible...the scenes of distress and misery have sunk deeper in my mind. I have been quite haunted by them.\n\nReturning home he was created a peer of the United Kingdom as Viscount Gordon, of Aberdeen in the County of Aberdeen (1814), and made a member of the Privy Council. In July 1815 he married his former sister-in-law Harriet, daughter of John Douglas, and widow of James Hamilton, Viscount Hamilton; the marriage was much less happy than his first. During the ensuing thirteen years Aberdeen took a less prominent part in public affairs.\n\nLord Aberdeen served as Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster between January and June 1828 and subsequently as Foreign Secretary until 1830 under the Duke of Wellington. He resigned with Wellington over the Reform Bill of 1832.\nHe was Secretary of State for War and the Colonies between 1834 and 1835, and again Foreign Secretary between 1841 and 1846 under Sir Robert Peel. It was during his second stint as Foreign Secretary, that he had the harbor settlement of 'Little Hong Kong', on the south side of Hong Kong Island named after him. It was probably the most productive period of his career, that he settled two disagreements with the US – the Northeast Boundary dispute by the Webster-Ashburton Treaty (1842), and the Oregon dispute by the Oregon Treaty of 1846. He also worked successfully to improve relationships with France, where Guizot had become a personal friend. He enjoyed the trust of Queen Victoria, which was still important for a Foreign Secretary. He again followed his leader and resigned with Peel over the issue of the Corn Laws.\n\nAfter Peel's death in 1850 he became the recognised leader of the Peelites. In July 1852, a general election of Parliament was held which resulted in the election of 325 Tory/Conservative party members to Parliament. This represented 42.7% seats in Parliament. The main opposition to the Tory/Conservative Party was the Whig Party, which elected 292 members of the party to the Parliament in July 1852. Although occupying fewer seats than the Tory/Conservatives, the Whigs had a chance to draw support from the minor parties and independents who were also elected in July 1852. Lord Aberdeen as the leader of the Peelites was one of 38 Peelites elected to members of Parliament independently of the Tory/Conservative Party.\n\nWhile the Peelites agreed with the Whigs on issues dealing with the international trade, there were other issues which the Peelites disagreed with the Whigs. Indeed, Lord Aberdeen's own dislike of the Ecclesiastical Titles Assumption Bill, the rejection of which he failed to secure in 1851, prevented him from joining the government of Whig government of Lord John Russell in 1851. Additionally, 113 of the members of Parliament elected in July 1852 were Free Traders. These members agreed with the Peelites on the repeal of the \"Corn Laws,\" but they felt that the tariffs on \"all\" consumer products should be removed.\n\nFurthermore, 63 members of Parliament elected in 1852, were members of the \"Irish Brigade,\" who voted with the Peelites and the Whigs for the repeal of the Corn Laws because they sought an end the Great Irish Famine by means of cheaper wheat and bread prices for the poor and middle classes in Ireland. Currently, however, neither the Free Traders and the Irish Brigade had disagreements with the Whigs that prevented them from joining with the Whigs form a government. Accordingly, the Tory/Conservative Party leader the Earl of Derby was asked to form a \"minority government\". However, the Earl of Derby appointed Benjamin Disraeli as the Chancellor of the Exchequer for the minority government.\n\nWhen in December 1852, the new Chancellor of the Exchequer submitted his budget to Parliament on behalf of the minority government, the Peelites, the Free Traders and the Irish Brigade were all alienated by the proposed budget. Accordingly, each of these groups suddenly forgot their differences with the Whig Party and voted with the Whigs against the proposed budget. The vote was 286 in favour of the budget and 305 votes against the budget. Because the leadership of the minority government had made the vote on the budget vote a \"vote of confidence\" in the minority government, the defeat of the Disraeli budget was a \"vote of no confidence\" in the minority government and meant the downfall of the minority government. Accordingly, Lord Aberdeen was asked to form a new government.\n\n Following the downfall of the Tory/Conservative minority government under Lord Derby in December 1852, Lord Aberdeen formed a new government from the coalition of Free Traders, Peelites and Whigs that had voted no confidence in the minority government. Lord Aberdeen was able to put together a coalition government of these groups that held 53.8% of the seats of Parliament. Thus Lord Aberdeen, a Peelite, became Prime Minister and headed a coalition ministry of Whigs and Peelites.\n\nAlthough united on international trade issues and on questions of domestic reform, his cabinet which also contained Lord Palmerston and Lord John Russell, who were certain to differ on questions of foreign policy. Charles Greville says in his \"Memoirs\", \"In the present cabinet are five or six first-rate men of equal, or nearly equal, pretensions, none of them likely to acknowledge the superiority or defer to the opinions of any other, and every one of these five or six considering himself abler and more important than their premier\"; and Sir James Graham wrote, \"It is a powerful team, but it will require good driving\"; this Aberdeen was unable to provide. During the administration, much trouble was caused by the rivalry between these two, and over the course of it Palmerston managed to out-manoeuvre Russell to emerge as the Whig heir-apparent. The cabinet also included a single Radical Sir William Molesworth, but much later, when justifying to the Queen his own new appointments, Gladstone told her: \"For instance, even in Ld Aberdeen's Govt, in 52, Sir William Molesworth had been selected, at that time, a very advanced Radical, but who was perfectly harmless, & took little, or no part ... He said these people generally became very moderate, when they were in office\", which she admitted had been the case.\n\nOne of the foreign policy issues on which Palmerston and Russell disagreed was the type of relationship that Britain should have with France and especially France's ruler, Louis Bonaparte. Louis Bonaparte was the nephew of the famous Napoleon Bonaparte, who had become dictator and then Emperor of France from 1804 until 1814. Louis Bonaparte had been elected to a three-year term as President of the Second Republic of France on 20 December 1848. The Constitution of the Second Republic limited the President to a single term in office. Thus, Louis Bonaparte would be unable to succeed himself and after 20 December 1851 would no longer be President. Thus, on 2 December 1851, shortly before the end of his single three-year term in office was to expire, Louis Bonaparte staged a coup against the Second Republic in France, disbanded the elected Constituent Assembly, arrested some of the Republican leaders and declared himself Emperor Napoleon III of France. This coup upset many democrats in England as well as in France. Some British government officials felt that Louis Bonaparte was seeking foreign adventure in the spirit of his uncle—Napoleon I. Consequently, these officials felt that any close association with Louis Bonaparte would eventually lead Britain into another series of wars, like the wars with France and Napoleon dating from 1793 until 1815. British relations with France had scarcely improved since 1815. As prime minister, the Earl of Aberdeen was one of these officials, who feared France and Louis Bonaparte.\n\nHowever, other British government officials were beginning to worry more about the rising political dominance of the Russian Empire in eastern Europe and the corresponding decline of the Ottoman Empire. Lord Palmerston, who at the time of Louis Bonaparte's 2 December 1851 coup was serving as the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs in the Whig government of Prime Minister Lord John Russell. Without informing the rest of the cabinet or Queen Victoria, Palmerston had sent a private note to the French ambassador endorsing Louis Bonaparte's coup and congratulating Louis Bonaparte, himself, on the coup. Queen Victoria and members of the Russell government demanded that Palmerston be dismissed as Foreign Minister. John Russell requested Palmerston's resignation and Palmerston reluctantly provided it.\n\nIn February 1852, Palmerston took revenge on Russell by voting with the Conservatives in a \"no confidence\" vote against the Russell government. This brought an end to the Russell Whig government and set the stage for a general election in July 1852 which eventually brought the Conservatives to power in a minority government under the Earl of Derby. Another problem facing the Earl of Aberdeen in the formation of his new government in December 1852, was Lord Russell himself. Lord Russell was the leader of the Whig Party, the largest group in the coalition government. Consequently, Lord Aberdeen, was required to appoint Lord Russell as the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, which he had done on 29 December 1852. However, Lord Russell sometimes liked to use this position to speak for the whole government, as if he were the prime minister. In 1832, John Russell had been nicknamed \"Finality John\" because of his statement that the 1832 Reform Act had just been approved by both the House of Commons and the House of Lords would be the \"final\" expansion of the vote in Britain. There would be no further extension of the ballot to the common people of Britain. However, as political pressure in favour of further reform had risen over the twenty years since 1832, John Russell had changed his mind. While the Whigs were still part of the Opposition under the minority government of the Earl of Derby, John Russell had said, in January 1852, that he intended to introduce a new reform bill into the House of Commons which would equalise the populations of the districts from which members of Parliament were elected. Probably as a result of their continuing feud, Palmerston declared himself against this Reform Bill of 1852. As a result, support for the Reform Bill of 1852 dwindled and Russell was forced to change his mind again and not introduce the any Reform Bill in 1852.\n\nIn order to form the coalition government, the Earl of Aberdeen had been required to appoint both Palmerston and Russell to his cabinet. Because of the controversy surrounding Palmerston's removal as Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs because of his letter to the French ambassador endorsing Louis Bonaparte's 2 December 1851 coup, Palmerston could not now be appointed Foreign Minister again so soon after his removal from the same position. Thus on 28 December 1852, the Earl of Aberdeen appointed Palmerston as Home Secretary and appointed John Russell as Foreign Minister.\n\nGiven the differences of opinion within the Lord Aberdeen cabinet over the direction of foreign policy with regard to relations between Britain and the French under Napoleon III, it is not surprising that debate raged within the government as Louis Bonaparte, now assuming the title of Emperor Napoleon III of France. As Prime Minister of the Peelite/Whig coalition government, the Earl of Aberdeen eventually led Britain into war on the side of the French/Ottomans against the Russian Empire. This war would eventually be called Crimean War, but the entire foreign policy negotiations surrounding the dismemberment of the Ottoman Empire, which would continue throughout the middle and end of nineteenth century the problem would be referred to as the \"Eastern Question\". Aberdeen was ordinarily a sympathiser with Russian interests against French/Napoleonic interests. Thus, he was really not in favour of the entrance of into the Crimean War. However, he was following the pressure that was being exerted on him from some members of his cabinet, including Palmerston, who in this rare instance was actually being supported by John Russell, both of whom were in favour of a more aggressive policy against perceived Russian expansion. Aberdeen, unable to control Palmerston, acquiesced. However the Eastern Question and the resulting Crimean War proved to be the downfall of his government.\n\nThe Eastern Question began as early as the 2 December 1852 with the Napoleonic coup against the Second Republic of France. As he was forming his new imperial government, Napoleon III sent an ambassador to the Ottoman Empire with instructions to assert France's right to protect Christian sites in Jerusalem and the Holy Land. The Ottoman Empire agreed to this condition to avoid conflict or potential war with France. Aberdeen, as Foreign Secretary, had himself tacitly authorised the construction of the first Anglican church in Jerusalem in 1845, following his predecessor's commission in 1838 of the first European Consul in Jerusalem on Britain's behalf, which lead to series of successive appointments by other nations. Both resulted from Lord Shaftesbury's canvassing with substantial public support. Nevertheless, Britain became increasingly worried about the situation in Turkey and Prime Minister Aberdeen sent Lord Stratford de Redcliffe, a diplomat with vast experience in Turkey, as a special envoy to the Ottoman Empire to guard British interests. Russia protested the Turkish agreement with the French as a violation of the Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca of 1778—the treaty which ended the Russo-Turkish War (1768–74). Under this treaty, the Russians had been granted the exclusive right to protect the Christian sites in the Holy Land. Accordingly. on 7 May 1853, the Russians sent Prince Alexander Sergeyevich Menshikov, one their premier statesmen to negotiate a settlement of the issue. Prince Menshikov called the attention of the Turks to the fact that during the Russo-Turkish War, the Russians had occupied the Turkish controlled provinces of Wallachia and Moldavia on the north bank of the Danube River, but he reminded them that pursuant to the Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca, however, the Russians had returned these \"Danubian provinces\" to Ottoman control in exchange for the right to protect the Christian sites in the Holy Land. Accordingly, the Turks reversed themselves and agreed with the Russians.\n\nThe French sent one of their premier ships-of-the-line, the \"Charlemagne\" to the Black Sea as a show of force. In light of the French show of force, the Turks, again, reversed themselves and recognised the French right to protect the Christian sites. Lord Stratford de Redcliffe was advising the Ottomans during this time and later, it was alleged, that he had been instrumental in persuading the Turks to reject the Russian arguments.\n\nAs war became inevitable, Aberdeen wrote to Russell:\nThe abstract justice of the cause, although indisputable, is but a poor consolation for the inevitable calamities of all war, or for a decison which I am not without fear may prove to have been impolitic and unwise. My conscience upbraids me the more, because seeing, as I did from the first, all that was to be apprehended, it is possible that by a little more energy and vigour, not on the Danube, but in Downing Street, it might have been prevented.\n\nIn response this latest change of mind by the Ottomans/Turks, the Russians, on 2 July 1853 occupied the Turkish-satellite states of Wallachia and Moldavia, as they had during the Russo-Turkish War of 1768-1774. Almost immediately, the Russian troops deployed along the northern banks of the Danube River, implying that they may cross the river. Aberdeen ordered the British Fleet to Constantinople and later into the Black Sea. On 23 October 1853, the Ottoman Empire declared war on Russia. A Russian naval raid on Sinope, on 30 November 1853, resulted in the destruction of the Turkish fleet in the battle of Sinope. When Russia ignored an Anglo-French ultimatum to abandon the Danubian provinces, Britain and France declared war on Russia on 28 March 1854. In September 1854, British and French troops landed on the Crimean peninsula at Eupatoria north of Sevastopol. The Allied troops then moved across the Alma River on 20 September 1854 at the battle of Alma and set siege to the fort of Sevastopol.\n\nA Russian attack on the allied supply base at Balaclava on 25 October 1854 was rebuffed. The Battle of Balaclava is noted for its famous (or rather infamous) Charge of the Light Brigade. On 5 November 1854, Russian forces tried to relieve the siege at Sevastopol and tried to defeat the Allied armies in the field in the Battle of Inkerman. However, this attempt failed and the Russians were rebuffed. Dissatisfaction as to the course of the war arose in England. As reports returned detailing the mismanagement of the conflict arose Parliament began to investigate. On 29 January 1855, John Arthur Roebuck introduced a motion for the appointment of a select committee to enquire into the conduct of the war. This motion was carried by the large majority of 305 in favour and 148 against.\n\nTreating this as a vote of no confidence in his government, Aberdeen resigned, and retired from active politics, speaking for the last time in the House of Lords in 1858. In visiting Windsor Castle to resign, he told the Queen: \"Nothing could have been better, he said than the feeling of the members towards each other. Had it not been for the incessant attempts of Ld John Russell to keep up party differences, it must be acknowledged that the experiment of a coalition had succeeded admirably. We discussed future possibilities & agreed that nothing remained to be done, but to offer the Govt to Ld Derby...\". The Queen continued to criticise Lord John Russell, for his behaviour for the rest of his life, on his death in 1878 her journal records that he was: \"A man of much talent, who leaves a name behind him, kind, & good, with a great knowledge of the constitution, who behaved very well, on many trying occasions; but he was impulsive, very selfish (as shown on many occasions, especially during Ld Aberdeen's administration) vain, & often reckless & imprudent\".\n\nLord Aberdeen married Lady Catherine Elizabeth Hamilton, daughter of Lord Abercorn, in 1805. They had one son and three daughters, all of whom predeceased their father. In July 1815 he married Harriet, daughter of John Douglas, and widow of James Hamilton, Viscount Hamilton, his first wife's sister-in-law. They had four sons and one daughter. His eldest son, George, succeeded as fifth Earl, and was the father of John, the seventh Earl, who was created Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair in 1916. Aberdeen's second son was General Sir Alexander Hamilton-Gordon; his third son was the Reverend Douglas Hamilton-Gordon; and his youngest son Arthur Gordon was created Baron Stanmore in 1893. The Countess of Aberdeen died in August 1833. Lord Aberdeen died at Argyll House, St. James's, London, on 14 December 1860, and was buried in the family vault at Stanmore. In 1994 the novelist, columnist and politician Ferdinand Mount used George Gordon's life as the basis for a historical novel, \"Umbrella\".\n\nApart from his political career Aberdeen was also a scholar of the classical civilisations, who published \"An Inquiry into the Principles of Beauty in Grecian Architecture\" (London, 1822) and was referred to by his cousin Lord Byron in his \"English Bards and Scotch Reviewers\" (1809) as \"the travell'd thane, Athenian Aberdeen.\" He was appointed Chancellor of the University of Aberdeen in 1827 and was President of the Society of Antiquaries of London.\n\nAberdeen's biographer Muriel Chamberlain summarises \"Religion never came easy to him\". In his Scots landowning capacity \"North of the border, he considered himself \"ex officio\" a Presbyterian\"; in England \"he privately considered himself an Anglican\", as early as 1840 told Gladstone he preferred what Aberdeen called \"the sister church [of England]\" and when in London worshipped at St James's Piccadilly. He was ultimately buried in the Anglican parish church at Stanmore, Middlesex.\n\nHe was a member of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland from 1818 to 1828 and exercised his existing rights to present ministers to parishes on his Scottish estates through a time when the right of churches to veto the appointment or 'call' of a minister became so contentious as to lead in 1843 to the schism known as \"the Disruption\" when a third of ministers broke away to form the Free Church of Scotland. In the House of Lords, in 1840 and 1843, he raised two Compromise Bills to allow presbyteries but not congregations the right of veto. The first failed to pass (and was voted against by the General Assembly) but the latter, raised post-schism, became law for Scotland and remained in force until patronage of Scots livings was abolished in 1874.\n\nHe is said in the last few months of his life, post Crimean War, to have declined to contribute to building a church on his Scotland estates because of sense of guilt in having \"shed much blood\", citing biblically King David's being forbidden to build the Temple in Jerusalem.\n\n\n\n\n \n", "id": "12879", "title": "George Hamilton-Gordon, 4th Earl of Aberdeen"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12880", "text": "GnuCash\n\nGnuCash is a free software accounting program that implements a double-entry bookkeeping system. It was initially aimed at developing capabilities similar to Intuit, Inc.'s Quicken application, but also has features for small business accounting. Recent development has been focused on adapting to modern desktop support-library requirements.\n\nGnuCash is part of the GNU Project, and runs on Linux, GNU, OpenBSD, FreeBSD, Solaris, macOS, and other Unix-like platforms. A Microsoft Windows (2000 or newer) port was made available starting with the 2.2.0 series.\n\nProgramming on GnuCash began in 1997, and its first stable release was in 1998. Small Business Accounting was added in 2001. A Mac installer became available in 2004. A Windows port was released in 2007.\n\nIn May 2012, the development of GnuCash for Android was announced. This is an expense-tracking companion app for GnuCash, as opposed to a stand-alone accounting package.\n\n\n\nGnuCash is written primarily in C, with a small fraction in Scheme. One of the available features is pure fixed-point arithmetic to avoid rounding errors which would arise with floating-point arithmetic. This feature was introduced with version 1.6.\n\nThe Android App for GnuCash is written in Java and does not share any code with the PC software.\n\nUsers on the GnuCash mailing list have reported using it for United States 501(c)3 non-profit organizations successfully. However, the reports need to be exported and edited.\n\nSlaw, a Canadian legal webzine, offered this advice to lawyers just starting out in practice, especially those who are trying to pay off student loans, \"The GnuCash software...should present a great alternative for lawyers looking for a solid accounting system at low cost. Do not believe that open source software is somehow second-class.\"\n\nIn April 2011, the Minnesota State Bar Association made their GnuCash trust accounting guide freely available in PDF format.\n\nAs of June 2012, Sourceforge shows a count of over 2.7 million downloads of the stable releases starting from July 2007 with GnuCash 2.2. Also, Sourceforge shows that current downloads are running at 13,775 per week. However, this doesn’t include other software download sites as well as Linux distributions that provide download from their own repositories.\n\nOhloh did an analysis of the source code repository and compared the commit activity for the two years before March 2012 and concluded that the project has a mature, well established code base, with increasing year-over-year development activity and a large active development team.\n\n\n\n", "id": "12880", "title": "GnuCash"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12881", "text": "George Robert Aberigh-Mackay\n\nGeorge Robert Aberigh-Mackay (25 July 184812 January 1881), Anglo-Indian writer, son of a Bengal chaplain, was educated at Magdalen College School, Oxford and Cambridge University. Entering the Indian education department in 1870, he became professor of English literature in Delhi College in 1873, tutor to the Raja of Rutlam in 1876, and principal of the Rajkumar College at Indore in 1877. On 8 January 1881 he developed symptoms of tetanus after playing polo and tennis on the previous 2 days, and died on 12 January 1881 in Indore.\n\nHe is best known for his book \"Twenty-one Days in India\" (1878–1879), a satire upon Anglo-Indian society and modes of thought. This book gave promise of a successful literary career, but the author died at the age of thirty-three.\nAberigh-Mackay wrote also an extensive manual giving first-hand data about the princely states and their rulers.\n\n", "id": "12881", "title": "George Robert Aberigh-Mackay"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12882", "text": "Gallon\n\nThe gallon () is a unit of measurement for liquid capacity in both the US customary units and the British imperial systems of measurement. Three significantly different sizes are in current use: the \"imperial\" gallon defined as litres, which is used in the United Kingdom, Canada, and some Caribbean nations; the \"US\" gallon defined as , which is used in the US and some Latin American and Caribbean countries; and the least-used \"US dry\" gallon defined as .\n\nWhile there is no official symbol for the gallon (as there are for SI units), gal is in common use.\n\nThe gallon currently has one definition in the imperial system, and two definitions (liquid and dry) in the US customary system. Historically, there were many definitions and redefinitions.\n\nThere were more than a few systems of liquid measurements in the pre-1884 United Kingdom.\n\nThe imperial (UK) gallon, now defined as exactly litres (about 277.42 cubic inches), is used in some Commonwealth countries and was originally based on the volume of 10 pounds (approximately 4.54 kg) of water at . The imperial fluid ounce is defined as of an imperial gallon; there are four quarts in a gallon, two pints in a quart, and 20 Imperial fluid ounces in an imperial pint.\n\nThe US gallon is legally defined as 231 cubic inches, which is exactly liters. A US liquid gallon of water weighs about at , making it about 16.6% lighter than the imperial gallon. There are four quarts in a gallon, two pints in a quart and 16 US fluid ounces in a US pint, which makes the US fluid ounce equal to of a US gallon. In order to overcome the effects of expansion and contraction with temperature when using a gallon to specify a quantity of material for purposes of trade, it is common to define the temperature at which the material will occupy the specified volume. For example, the volume of petroleum products and alcoholic beverages are both referenced to in government regulations.\n\nThis dry measure is one-eighth of a US \"Winchester\" bushel of cubic inches; it is therefore equal to exactly 268.8025 cubic inches or about . The US dry gallon is not used in commerce, and is not listed in the relevant statute, which jumps from the dry quart to the peck.\n\nThe Imperial gallon is used in everyday life (and in advertising) in the United Kingdom, and less frequently in Canada, including fuel economy expression in advertisements and other official publications. Gallons used in fuel economy expression in Canada are Imperial gallons.\nThe gallon was removed from the list of legally defined primary units of measure catalogued in the EU directive 80/181/EEC, for trading and official purposes, with effect from 31 December 1994. Under the directive the gallon could still be used – but only as a supplementary or secondary unit. One of the impacts of this directive was that the United Kingdom amended its own legislation to replace the gallon with the litre as a primary unit of measure in trade and in the conduct of public business, effective from 30 September 1995.\n\nIreland also passed legislation in response to the EU directive with the effective date being 31 December 1993. Though the gallon has ceased to be the legally defined primary unit, it can still be legally used in both the UK and Ireland as a supplementary unit.\n\nThe Imperial gallon continues to be used as a unit of measure in Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, the Bahamas, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Is., Dominica, Grenada, Montserrat, Myanmar (Burma), St. Kitts & Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent & the Grenadines.\n\nOther than the United States, the US gallon is used in Liberia, Belize, Colombia, The Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Peru.\n\nThe United Arab Emirates started selling gasoline by the litre in 2010, along with Guyana, and Panama in 2013.\nThe two former had used the Imperial gallon, and the latter the US gallon until they switched.\n\nAntigua and Barbuda plan to switch over to using litres by 2015.\n\nDespite its status as a U.S. territory, and unlike American Samoa, the Northern Mariana Islands, Guam, and the U.S. Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico ceased selling gasoline by the US gallon in 1980.\n\nIn the Turks & Caicos Islands, both the U.S. gallon and Imperial gallon are used, due to an increase in tax duties disguised by levying the same duty on the 3.79 L U.S. gallon as was previously levied on the 4.55 L Imperial gallon.\n\nSome cowboy hats have been called \"ten-gallon\" hats. The term came into use about 1925. The Stetson hat company boasted that the tight weave of most Stetson hats made them sufficiently waterproof to be used as a bucket. Early print advertising by Stetson showed a cowboy giving his horse a drink of water from a hat. However, even the Stetson company notes that a \"ten-gallon\" hat holds only 3 quarts (about 3 L instead of about 38 L).\n\nBoth the US liquid and imperial gallon are divided into four quarts (\"quart\"er gallons), which in turn are divided into two pints. These pints are divided into two cups (though the imperial cup is rarely used now), which in turn are divided into two gills (gills are also rarely used). Thus a gallon is equal to four quarts, eight pints, sixteen cups or thirty-two gills. The imperial gill is further divided into five fluid ounces, whereas the US gill is divided into four fluid ounces. Thus an imperial fluid ounce is of an imperial pint or of an imperial gallon, while a US fluid ounce is of a US pint or of a US gallon.\n\nThe imperial gallon, quart, pint, cup and gill are approximately 20% larger than their US counterparts and are therefore not interchangeable. The imperial fluid ounce, on the other hand, is only 4% smaller than the US fluid ounce and therefore they are often used interchangeably.\n\nThe term derives most immediately from \"galun, galon\" in Old Northern French, but the usage was common in several languages, for example \"jale\" in Old French and \"gęllet\" (bowl) in Old English. This suggests a common origin in Romance Latin, but the ultimate source of the word is unknown. The gallon originated as the base of systems for measuring wine, and beer in England. The sizes of gallon used in these two systems were different from each other: the first was based on the wine gallon (equal in size to the US gallon), and the second on either the ale gallon or the larger imperial gallon.\n\nBy the end of the 18th century, three definitions of the gallon were in common use: \n\nThe \"corn\" or \"dry gallon\" was used in the United States until recently for grain and other dry commodities. It is one-eighth of the (Winchester) bushel, originally a cylindrical measure of inches in diameter and 8 inches in depth. That made the dry gallon . The bushel, which like dry quart and pint still sees some use, was later defined to be 2150.42 cubic inches exactly, making its gallon exactly ().\nIn previous centuries, there had been a corn gallon of around 271 to 272 cubic inches.\n\nThe \"wine\", \"fluid\", or \"liquid gallon\" has been the standard US gallon since the early 19th century. The wine gallon, which some sources relate to the volume occupied by eight medieval merchant pounds of wine, was at one time defined as the volume of a cylinder 6 inches deep and 7 inches in diameter, i.e. . It had been redefined during the reign of Queen Anne, in 1706, as 231 cubic inches exactly, which is the result of the earlier definition with \"π\" approximated to . Although the wine gallon had been used for centuries for import duty purposes there was no legal standard of it in the Exchequer and a smaller gallon was actually in use, so this statute became necessary. It remains the US definition today.\n\nIn 1824, Britain adopted a close approximation to the \"ale gallon\" known as the \"imperial gallon\" and abolished all other gallons in favour of it. Inspired by the kilogram-litre relationship, the imperial gallon was based on the volume of 10 pounds of distilled water weighed in air with brass weights with the barometer standing at 30 inches of mercury and at a temperature of . In 1963, this definition was refined as the space occupied by 10 pounds of distilled water of density weighed in air of density against weights of density (the original \"brass\" was refined as the density of brass alloys vary depending on metallurgical composition). This works out at approximately (). The metric definition of exactly cubic decimetres (also after the litre was redefined in 1964, ≈ ) was adopted shortly afterwards in Canada, but from 1976 the conventional value of was used in the United Kingdom until the Canadian convention was adopted in 1985.\n\nHistorically, gallons of various sizes were used in many parts of Western Europe. In these localities, it has been replaced as the unit of capacity by the litre.\n\n", "id": "12882", "title": "Gallon"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12883", "text": "Gini coefficient\n\nThe Gini coefficient (sometimes expressed as a Gini ratio or a normalized Gini index) ( ) is a measure of statistical dispersion intended to represent the income or wealth distribution of a nation's residents, and is the most commonly used measure of inequality. It was developed by the Italian statistician and sociologist Corrado Gini and published in his 1912 paper \"Variability and Mutability\" ().\n\nThe Gini coefficient measures the inequality among values of a frequency distribution (for example, levels of income). A Gini coefficient of zero expresses perfect equality, where all values are the same (for example, where everyone has the same income). A Gini coefficient of 1 (or 100%) expresses maximal inequality among values (e.g., for a large number of people, where only one person has all the income or consumption, and all others have none, the Gini coefficient will be very nearly one). However, a value greater than one may occur if some persons represent negative contribution to the total (for example, having negative income or wealth). For larger groups, values close to or above 1 are very unlikely in practice. Given the normalization of both the cumulative population and the cumulative share of income used to calculate the Gini coefficient, the measure is not overly sensitive to the specifics of the income distribution, but rather only on how incomes vary relative to the other members of a population. The exception to this is in the redistribution of wealth resulting in a minimum income for all people. When the population is sorted, if their income distribution were to approximate a well known function, then some representative values could be calculated.\n\nThe Gini coefficient was proposed by Gini as a measure of inequality of income or wealth. For OECD countries, in the late 20th century, considering the effect of taxes and transfer payments, the income Gini coefficient ranged between 0.24 and 0.49, with Slovenia the lowest and Chile the highest. African countries had the highest pre-tax Gini coefficients in 2008–2009, with South Africa the world's highest, variously estimated to be 0.63 to 0.7, although this figure drops to 0.52 after social assistance is taken into account, and drops again to 0.47 after taxation. The global income Gini coefficient in 2005 has been estimated to be between 0.61 and 0.68 by various sources.\n\nThere are some issues in interpreting a Gini coefficient. The same value may result from many different distribution curves. The demographic structure should be taken into account. Countries with an aging population, or with a baby boom, experience an increasing pre-tax Gini coefficient even if real income distribution for working adults remains constant. Scholars have devised over a dozen variants of the Gini coefficient.\n\nThe Gini coefficient is usually defined mathematically based on the Lorenz curve, which plots the proportion of the total income of the population (y axis) that is cumulatively earned by the bottom x% of the population (see diagram). The line at 45 degrees thus represents perfect equality of incomes. The Gini coefficient can then be thought of as the ratio of the area that lies between the line of equality and the Lorenz curve (marked \"A\" in the diagram) over the total area under the line of equality (marked \"A\" and \"B\" in the diagram); i.e., . It is also equal to and to due to the fact that (since the axes scale from 0 to 1).\n\nIf all people have non-negative income (or wealth, as the case may be), the Gini coefficient can theoretically range from 0 (complete equality) to 1 (complete inequality); it is sometimes expressed as a percentage ranging between 0 and 100. In practice, both extreme values are not quite reached. If negative values are possible (such as the negative wealth of people with debts), then the Gini coefficient could theoretically be more than 1. Normally the mean (or total) is assumed positive, which rules out a Gini coefficient less than zero.\n\nAn alternative approach would be to consider the Gini coefficient as half of the relative mean absolute difference, which is a mathematical equivalence.\nThe mean absolute difference is the average absolute difference of all pairs of items of the population, and the relative mean absolute difference is the mean absolute difference divided by the average, to normalize for scale. if \"x\" is the wealth or income of person \"i\", and there are \"n\" persons, then the Gini coefficient \"G\" is given by:\n\nWhen the income (or wealth) distribution is given as a continuous probability distribution function \"p(x)\", where \"p(x)dx\" is the fraction of the population with income \"x\" to \"x+dx\", then the Gini coefficient is again half of the relative mean absolute difference:\n\nwhere μ is the mean of the distribution formula_3 and the lower limits of integration may be replaced by zero when all incomes are positive.\n\nThe most equal society will be one in which every person receives the same income (); the most unequal society will be one in which a single person receives 100% of the total income and the remaining people receive none ().\n\nWhile the income distribution of any particular country need not follow simple functions, these functions give a qualitative understanding of the income distribution in a nation given the Gini coefficient. The effects of minimum income policy due to redistribution can be seen in the linear relationships.\n\nAn informative simplified case just distinguishes two levels of income, low and high. If the high income group is \"u\" % of the population and earns a fraction \"f\" % of all income, then the Gini coefficient is . An actual more graded distribution with these same values \"u\" and \"f\" will always have a higher Gini coefficient than .\n\nThe proverbial case where the richest 20% have 80% of all income would lead to an income Gini coefficient of at least 60%.\n\nAn often cited case that 1% of all the world's population owns 50% of all wealth, means a wealth Gini coefficient of at least 49%.\n\nIn some cases, this equation can be applied to calculate the Gini coefficient without direct reference to the Lorenz curve. For example, (taking \"y\" to mean the income or wealth of a person or household):\n\nSince the Gini coefficient is half the relative mean absolute difference, it can also be calculated using formulas for the relative mean absolute difference. For a random sample \"S\" consisting of values \"y\", \"i\" = 1 to \"n\", that are indexed in non-decreasing order (\"y\" ≤ \"y\"), the statistic:\n\nThere does not exist a sample statistic that is in general an unbiased estimator of the population Gini coefficient, like the relative mean absolute difference.\n\nFor a discrete probability distribution with probability mass function \"f ( y )\", \"i\" = 1 to \"n\", where \"f ( y )\" is the fraction of the population with income or wealth \"y \">0, the Gini coefficient is:\n\nWhen the population is large, the income distribution may be represented by a continuous probability density function \"f(x)\" where \"f(x) dx\" is the fraction of the population with wealth or income in the interval \"dx\" about \"x\". If \"F(x)\" is the cumulative distribution function for \"f(x)\", then the Lorenz curve \"L(F)\" may then be represented as a function parametric in \"L(x)\" and \"F(x)\" and the value of \"B\" can be found by integration:\n\nThe Gini coefficient can also be calculated directly from the cumulative distribution function of the distribution \"F\"(\"y\"). Defining μ as the mean of the distribution, and specifying that \"F\"(\"y\") is zero for all negative values, the Gini coefficient is given by:\nThe latter result comes from integration by parts. (Note that this formula can be applied when there are negative values if the integration is taken from minus infinity to plus infinity.)\n\nThe Gini coefficient may be expressed in terms of the quantile function \"Q\"(\"F\") (inverse of the cumulative distribution function: Q(F(x))=x)\n\nFor some functional forms, the Gini index can be calculated explicitly. For example, if \"y\" follows a lognormal distribution with the standard deviation of logs equal to formula_17, then formula_18 where formula_19 is the error function ( since formula_20, where formula_21 is the cumulative standard normal distribution). In the table below, some examples are shown. The Dirac delta distribution represents the case where everyone has the same wealth (or income); it implies that there are no variations at all between incomes.\n\nSometimes the entire Lorenz curve is not known, and only values at certain intervals are given. In that case, the Gini coefficient can be approximated by using various techniques for interpolating the missing values of the Lorenz curve. If (\"X\", \"Y\") are the known points on the Lorenz curve, with the \"X\" indexed in increasing order (\"X\" < \"X\"), so that:\nIf the Lorenz curve is approximated on each interval as a line between consecutive points, then the area B can be approximated with trapezoids and:\n\nis the resulting approximation for G. More accurate results can be obtained using other methods to approximate the area B, such as approximating the Lorenz curve with a quadratic function across pairs of intervals, or building an appropriately smooth approximation to the underlying distribution function that matches the known data. If the population mean and boundary values for each interval are also known, these can also often be used to improve the accuracy of the approximation.\n\nThe Gini coefficient calculated from a sample is a statistic and its standard error, or confidence intervals for the population Gini coefficient, should be reported. These can be calculated using bootstrap techniques but those proposed have been mathematically complicated and computationally onerous even in an era of fast computers. Ogwang (2000) made the process more efficient by setting up a \"trick regression model\" in which respective income variables in the sample are ranked with the lowest income being allocated rank 1. The model then expresses the rank (dependent variable) as the sum of a constant \"A\" and a normal error term whose variance is inversely proportional to \"y\";\n\nOgwang showed that \"G\" can be expressed as a function of the weighted least squares estimate of the constant \"A\" and that this can be used to speed up the calculation of the jackknife estimate for the standard error. Giles (2004) argued that the standard error of the estimate of \"A\" can be used to derive that of the estimate of \"G\" directly without using a jackknife at all. This method only requires the use of ordinary least squares regression after ordering the sample data. The results compare favorably with the estimates from the jackknife with agreement improving with increasing sample size.\n\nHowever it has since been argued that this is dependent on the model's assumptions about the error distributions (Ogwang 2004) and the independence of error terms (Reza & Gastwirth 2006) and that these assumptions are often not valid for real data sets. It may therefore be better to stick with jackknife methods such as those proposed by Yitzhaki (1991) and Karagiannis and Kovacevic (2000). The debate continues.\n\nGuillermina Jasso and Angus Deaton independently proposed the following formula for the Gini coefficient:\n\nwhere formula_25 is mean income of the population, P is the income rank P of person i, with income X, such that the richest person receives a rank of 1 and the poorest a rank of N. This effectively gives higher weight to poorer people in the income distribution, which allows the Gini to meet the Transfer Principle. Note that the Jasso-Deaton formula rescales the coefficient so that its value is 1 if all the formula_26 are zero except one. Note however Allison's reply on the need to divide by N² instead.\n\nFAO explains another version of the formula.\n\nThe Gini coefficient and other standard inequality indices reduce to a common form. Perfect equality—the absence of inequality—exists when and only when the inequality ratio, formula_27, equals 1 for all j units in some population (for example, there is perfect income equality when everyone's income formula_28 equals the mean income formula_29, so that formula_30 for everyone). Measures of inequality, then, are measures of the average deviations of the formula_30 from 1; the greater the average deviation, the greater the inequality. Based on these observations the inequality indices have this common form:\n\nwhere \"p\" weights the units by their population share, and \"f\"(\"r\") is a function of the deviation of each unit's \"r\" from 1, the point of equality. The insight of this generalised inequality index is that inequality indices differ because they employ different functions of the distance of the inequality ratios (the \"r\") from 1.\"\n\nGini coefficients of income are calculated on market income as well as disposable income basis. The Gini coefficient on market income—sometimes referred to as a pre-tax Gini coefficient—is calculated on income before taxes and transfers, and it measures inequality in income without considering the effect of taxes and social spending already in place in a country. The Gini coefficient on disposable income—sometimes referred to as after-tax Gini coefficient—is calculated on income after taxes and transfers, and it measures inequality in income after considering the effect of taxes and social spending already in place in a country.\n\nThe difference in Gini indices between OECD countries, on after-taxes and transfers basis, is significantly narrower. For OECD countries, over 2008–2009 period, Gini coefficient on pre-taxes and transfers basis for total population ranged between 0.34 and 0.53, with South Korea the lowest and Italy the highest. Gini coefficient on after-taxes and transfers basis for total population ranged between 0.25 and 0.48, with Denmark the lowest and Mexico the highest. For United States, the country with the largest population in OECD countries, the pre-tax Gini index was 0.49, and after-tax Gini index was 0.38, in 2008–2009. The OECD averages for total population in OECD countries was 0.46 for pre-tax income Gini index and 0.31 for after-tax income Gini Index. Taxes and social spending that were in place in 2008–2009 period in OECD countries significantly lowered effective income inequality, and in general, \"European countries—especially Nordic and Continental welfare states—achieve lower levels of income inequality than other countries.\"\n\nUsing the Gini can help quantify differences in welfare and compensation policies and philosophies. However it should be borne in mind that the Gini coefficient can be misleading when used to make political comparisons between large and small countries or those with different immigration policies (see limitations of Gini coefficient section).\n\nThe Gini coefficient for the entire world has been estimated by various parties to be between 0.61 and 0.68. The graph shows the values expressed as a percentage in their historical development for a number of countries.\nAccording to UNICEF, Latin America and the Caribbean region had the highest net income Gini index in the world at 48.3, on unweighted average basis in 2008. The remaining regional averages were: sub-Saharan Africa (44.2), Asia (40.4), Middle East and North Africa (39.2), Eastern Europe and Central Asia (35.4), and High-income Countries (30.9). Using the same method, the United States is claimed to have a Gini index of 36, while South Africa had the highest income Gini index score of 67.8.\n\nThe table below presents the estimated world income Gini coefficients over the last 200 years, as calculated by Milanovic. Taking income distribution of all human beings, the worldwide income inequality has been constantly increasing since the early 19th century. There was a steady increase in global income inequality Gini score from 1820 to 2002, with a significant increase between 1980 and 2002. This trend appears to have peaked and begun a reversal with rapid economic growth in emerging economies, particularly in the large populations of BRIC countries.\n\nGini coefficient is widely used in fields as diverse as sociology, economics, health science, ecology, engineering and agriculture. For example, in social sciences and economics, in addition to income Gini coefficients, scholars have published education Gini coefficients and opportunity Gini coefficients.\n\nEducation Gini index estimates the inequality in education for a given population. It is used to discern trends in social development through educational attainment over time. From a study of 85 countries, Thomas, et al. estimate Mali had the highest education Gini index of 0.92 in 1990 (implying very high inequality in education attainment across the population), while the United States had the lowest education inequality Gini index of 0.14. Between 1960 and 1990, South Korea, China and India had the fastest drop in education inequality Gini Index. They also claim education Gini index for the United States slightly increased over the 1980–1990 period.\n\nSimilar in concept to income Gini coefficient, opportunity Gini coefficient measures inequality of opportunity. The concept builds on Amartya Sen's suggestion that inequality coefficients of social development should be premised on the process of enlarging people's choices and enhancing their capabilities, rather than on the process of reducing income inequality. Kovacevic in a review of opportunity Gini coefficient explains that the coefficient estimates how well a society enables its citizens to achieve success in life where the success is based on a person's choices, efforts and talents, not his background defined by a set of predetermined circumstances at birth, such as, gender, race, place of birth, parent's income and circumstances beyond the control of that individual.\n\nIn 2003, Roemer reported Italy and Spain exhibited the largest opportunity inequality Gini index amongst advanced economies.\n\nIn 1978, Anthony Shorrocks introduced a measure based on income Gini coefficients to estimate income mobility. This measure, generalized by Maasoumi and Zandvakili, is now generally referred to as Shorrocks index, sometimes as Shorrocks mobility index or Shorrocks rigidity index. It attempts to estimate whether the income inequality Gini coefficient is permanent or temporary, and to what extent a country or region enables economic mobility to its people so that they can move from one (e.g. bottom 20%) income quantile to another (e.g. middle 20%) over time. In other words, Shorrocks index compares inequality of short-term earnings such as annual income of households, to inequality of long-term earnings such as 5-year or 10-year total income for same households.\n\nShorrocks index is calculated in number of different ways, a common approach being from the ratio of income Gini coefficients between short-term and long-term for the same region or country.\n\nA 2010 study using social security income data for the United States since 1937 and Gini-based Shorrocks indices concludes that income mobility in the United States has had a complicated history, primarily due to mass influx of women into the American labor force after World War II. Income inequality and income mobility trends have been different for men and women workers between 1937 and the 2000s. When men and women are considered together, the Gini coefficient-based Shorrocks index trends imply long-term income inequality has been substantially reduced among all workers, in recent decades for the United States. Other scholars, using just 1990s data or other short periods have come to different conclusions. For example, Sastre and Ayala, conclude from their study of income Gini coefficient data between 1993 and 1998 for six developed economies, that France had the least income mobility, Italy the highest, and the United States and Germany intermediate levels of income mobility over those 5 years.\n\nThe Gini coefficient has features that make it useful as a measure of dispersion in a population, and inequalities in particular. It is a ratio analysis method making it easier to interpret. It also avoids references to a statistical average or position unrepresentative of most of the population, such as per capita income or gross domestic product. For a given time interval, Gini coefficient can therefore be used to compare diverse countries and different regions or groups within a country; for example states, counties, urban versus rural areas, gender and ethnic groups. Gini coefficients can be used to compare income distribution over time, thus it is possible to see if inequality is increasing or decreasing independent of absolute incomes.\n\nOther useful features of the Gini coefficient include: \n\nA Gini index value above 50 is considered high; countries like the Seychelles, Brazil, Chile, Botswana and Central American countries can be found in this category. A Gini index value of 30 or above is considered medium; countries like Vietnam, Mexico, Poland, USA, Russia, and Venezuela can be found in this category. A Gini index value lower than 30 is considered low; countries like Austria, Afghanistan,India and Denmark can be found in this category.\n\nThe Gini coefficient is a relative measure. Its proper use and interpretation is controversial. It is possible for the Gini coefficient of a developing country to rise (due to increasing inequality of income) while the number of people in absolute poverty decreases. This is because the Gini coefficient measures relative, not absolute, wealth. Changing income inequality, measured by Gini coefficients, can be due to structural changes in a society such as growing population (baby booms, aging populations, increased divorce rates, extended family households splitting into nuclear families, emigration, immigration) and income mobility. Gini coefficients are simple, and this simplicity can lead to oversights and can confuse the comparison of different populations; for example, while both Bangladesh (per capita income of $1,693) and the Netherlands (per capita income of $42,183) had an income Gini coefficient of 0.31 in 2010, the quality of life, economic opportunity and absolute income in these countries are very different, i.e. countries may have identical Gini coefficients, but differ greatly in wealth. Basic necessities may be available to all in a developed economy, while in an undeveloped economy with the same Gini coefficient, basic necessities may be unavailable to most or unequally available, due to lower absolute wealth.\nEven when the total income of a population is the same, in certain situations two countries with different income distributions can have the same Gini index (e.g. cases when income Lorenz Curves cross). Table A illustrates one such situation. Both countries have a Gini coefficient of 0.2, but the average income distributions for household groups are different. As another example, in a population where the lowest 50% of individuals have no income and the other 50% have equal income, the Gini coefficient is 0.5; whereas for another population where the lowest 75% of people have 25% of income and the top 25% have 75% of the income, the Gini index is also 0.5. Economies with similar incomes and Gini coefficients can have very different income distributions. Bellù and Liberati claim that to rank income inequality between two different populations based on their Gini indices is sometimes not possible, or misleading.\n\nA Gini index does not contain information about absolute national or personal incomes. Populations can have very low income Gini indices, yet simultaneously very high wealth Gini index. By measuring inequality in income, the Gini ignores the differential efficiency of use of household income. By ignoring wealth (except as it contributes to income) the Gini can create the appearance of inequality when the people compared are at different stages in their life. Wealthy countries such as Sweden can show a low Gini coefficient for disposable income of 0.31 thereby appearing equal, yet have very high Gini coefficient for wealth of 0.79 to 0.86 thereby suggesting an extremely unequal wealth distribution in its society. These factors are not assessed in income-based Gini.\nGini index has a downward-bias for small populations. Counties or states or countries with small populations and less diverse economies will tend to report small Gini coefficients. For economically diverse large population groups, a much higher coefficient is expected than for each of its regions. Taking world economy as one, and income distribution for all human beings, for example, different scholars estimate global Gini index to range between 0.61 and 0.68.\nAs with other inequality coefficients, the Gini coefficient is influenced by the granularity of the measurements. For example, five 20% quantiles (low granularity) will usually yield a lower Gini coefficient than twenty 5% quantiles (high granularity) for the same distribution. Philippe Monfort has shown that using inconsistent or unspecified granularity limits the usefulness of Gini coefficient measurements.\n\nThe Gini coefficient measure gives different results when applied to individuals instead of households, for the same economy and same income distributions. If household data is used, the measured value of income Gini depends on how the household is defined. When different populations are not measured with consistent definitions, comparison is not meaningful.\n\nDeininger and Squire (1996) show that income Gini coefficient based on individual income, rather than household income, are different. For United States, for example, they find that individual income-based Gini coefficient was 0.35, while for France they report individual income-based Gini index to be 0.43. According to their individual focused method, in the 108 countries they studied, South Africa had the world's highest Gini coefficient at 0.62, Malaysia had Asia's highest Gini coefficient at 0.5, Brazil the highest at 0.57 in Latin America and Caribbean region, and Turkey the highest at 0.5 in OECD countries.\nExpanding on the importance of life-span measures, the Gini coefficient as a point-estimate of equality at a certain time, ignores life-span changes in income. Typically, increases in the proportion of young or old members of a society will drive apparent changes in equality, simply because people generally have lower incomes and wealth when they are young than when they are old. Because of this, factors such as age distribution within a population and mobility within income classes can create the appearance of inequality when none exist taking into account demographic effects. Thus a given economy may have a higher Gini coefficient at any one point in time compared to another, while the Gini coefficient calculated over individuals' lifetime income is actually lower than the apparently more equal (at a given point in time) economy's. Essentially, what matters is not just inequality in any particular year, but the composition of the distribution over time.\n\nKwok claims income Gini coefficient for Hong Kong has been high (0.434 in 2010), in part because of structural changes in its population. Over recent decades, Hong Kong has witnessed increasing numbers of small households, elderly households and elderly living alone. The combined income is now split into more households. Many old people are living separately from their children in Hong Kong. These social changes have caused substantial changes in household income distribution. Income Gini coefficient, claims Kwok, does not discern these structural changes in its society. Household money income distribution for the United States, summarized in Table C of this section, confirms that this issue is not limited to just Hong Kong. According to the US Census Bureau, between 1979 and 2010, the population of United States experienced structural changes in overall households, the income for all income brackets increased in inflation-adjusted terms, household income distributions shifted into higher income brackets over time, while the income Gini coefficient increased.\n\nAnother limitation of Gini coefficient is that it is not a proper measure of egalitarianism, as it is only measures income dispersion. For example, if two equally egalitarian countries pursue different immigration policies, the country accepting a higher proportion of low-income or impoverished migrants will report a higher Gini coefficient and therefore may appear to exhibit more income inequality.\n\nSome countries distribute benefits that are difficult to value. Countries that provide subsidized housing, medical care, education or other such services are difficult to value objectively, as it depends on quality and extent of the benefit. In absence of free markets, valuing these income transfers as household income is subjective. The theoretical model of Gini coefficient is limited to accepting correct or incorrect subjective assumptions.\n\nIn subsistence-driven and informal economies, people may have significant income in other forms than money, for example through subsistence farming or bartering. These income tend to accrue to the segment of population that is below-poverty line or very poor, in emerging and transitional economy countries such as those in sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, Asia and Eastern Europe. Informal economy accounts for over half of global employment and as much as 90 per cent of employment in some of the poorer sub-Saharan countries with high official Gini inequality coefficients. Schneider et al., in their 2010 study of 162 countries, report about 31.2%, or about $20 trillion, of world's GDP is informal. In developing countries, the informal economy predominates for all income brackets except for the richer, urban upper income bracket populations. Even in developed economies, between 8% (United States) to 27% (Italy) of each nation's GDP is informal, and resulting informal income predominates as a livelihood activity for those in the lowest income brackets. The value and distribution of the incomes from informal or underground economy is difficult to quantify, making true income Gini coefficients estimates difficult. Different assumptions and quantifications of these incomes will yield different Gini coefficients.\n\nGini has some mathematical limitations as well. It is not additive and different sets of people cannot be averaged to obtain the Gini coefficient of all the people in the sets.\n\nGiven the limitations of Gini coefficient, other statistical methods are used in combination or as an alternative measure of population dispersity. For example, \"entropy measures\" are frequently used (e.g. the Theil Index, the Atkinson index and the generalized entropy index). These measures attempt to compare the distribution of resources by intelligent agents in the market with a maximum entropy random distribution, which would occur if these agents acted like non-intelligent particles in a closed system following the laws of statistical physics.\n\nThe Gini coefficient closely related to the AUC (Area Under receiver operating characteristic Curve) measure of performance. The relation follows the formula formula_33 Gini coefficient is also closely related to Mann–Whitney U.\n\nThe Gini index is also related to Pietra index—both of which are a measure of statistical heterogeneity and are derived from Lorenz curve and the diagonal line.\n\nIn certain fields such as ecology, Simpson's index is used, which is related to Gini. Simpson index scales as mirror opposite to Gini; that is, with increasing diversity Simpson index takes a smaller value (0 means maximum, 1 means minimum heterogeneity per classic Simpson index). Simpson index is sometimes transformed by subtracting the observed value from the maximum possible value of 1, and then it is known as Gini-Simpson Index.\n\nAlthough the Gini coefficient is most popular in economics, it can in theory be applied in any field of science that studies a distribution. For example, in ecology the Gini coefficient has been used as a measure of biodiversity, where the cumulative proportion of species is plotted against cumulative proportion of individuals. In health, it has been used as a measure of the inequality of health related quality of life in a population. In education, it has been used as a measure of the inequality of universities. In chemistry it has been used to express the selectivity of protein kinase inhibitors against a panel of kinases. In engineering, it has been used to evaluate the fairness achieved by Internet routers in scheduling packet transmissions from different flows of traffic.\n\nThe Gini coefficient is sometimes used for the measurement of the discriminatory power of rating systems in credit risk management.\n\nA 2005 study accessed US census data to measure home computer ownership and used the Gini coefficient to measure inequalities amongst whites and African Americans. Results indicated that although decreasing overall, home computer ownership inequality is substantially smaller among white households. \n\nA 2016 peer-reviewed study titled Employing the Gini coefficient to measure participation inequality in treatment-focused Digital Health Social Networks illustrated that the Gini coefficient was helpful and accurate in measuring shifts in inequality, however as a standalone metric it failed to incorporate overall network size. \n\nThe discriminatory power refers to a credit risk model's ability to differentiate between defaulting and non-defaulting clients. The formula formula_34, in calculation section above, may be used for the final model and also at individual model factor level, to quantify the discriminatory power of individual factors. It is related to accuracy ratio in population assessment models.\n\n\n", "id": "12883", "title": "Gini coefficient"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12884", "text": "Government Communications Headquarters\n\nThe Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ) is a British intelligence and security organisation responsible for providing signals intelligence (SIGINT) and information assurance to the British government and armed forces. Based in \"The Doughnut\", in the suburbs of Cheltenham, GCHQ is the responsibility of the UK Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, but it is not a part of the Foreign Office and its Director ranks as a Permanent Secretary.\n\nGCHQ was originally established after the First World War as the \"Government Code and Cypher School\" (GC&CS) and was known under that name until 1946. During the Second World War it was located at Bletchley Park, where it was famed for its role in the breaking of the German Enigma codes. Currently there are two main components of the GCHQ, the Composite Signals Organisation (CSO), which is responsible for gathering information, and the CESG, which is responsible for securing the UK's own communications. The Joint Technical Language Service (JTLS) is a small department and cross-government resource responsible for mainly technical language support and translation and interpreting services across government departments. It is co-located with GCHQ for administrative purposes.\n\nIn 2013, GCHQ received considerable media attention when the former National Security Agency contractor Edward Snowden revealed that the agency was in the process of collecting all online and telephone data in the UK via the Tempora programme. Snowden's revelations began a spate of ongoing disclosures of global surveillance.\n\nGCHQ is led by the Director of GCHQ, currently Robert Hannigan, and a Corporate Board, made up of Executive and Non-Executive Directors. Reporting to the Corporate Board is:\n\nDuring the First World War, the United Kingdom's Army and Navy had separate signals intelligence agencies, MI1b and NID25 (initially known as Room 40) respectively. In 1919, the Cabinet's Secret Service Committee, chaired by Lord Curzon, recommended that a peace-time codebreaking agency should be created, a task given to the then-Director of Naval Intelligence, Hugh Sinclair. Sinclair merged staff from NID25 and MI1b into the new organisation, which initially consisted of around 25–30 officers and a similar number of clerical staff. It was titled the \"Government Code and Cypher School\", a cover-name chosen by Victor Forbes of the Foreign Office. Alastair Denniston, who had been a member of NID25, was appointed as its operational head. It was initially under the control of the Admiralty and located in Watergate House, Adelphi, London. Its public function was \"to advise as to the security of codes and cyphers used by all Government departments and to assist in their provision\", but also had a secret directive to \"study the methods of cypher communications used by foreign powers\". GC&CS officially formed on 1 November 1919, and produced its first decrypt on 19 October.\n\nBefore the Second World War, GC&CS was a relatively small department. By 1922, the main focus of GC&CS was on diplomatic traffic, with \"no service traffic ever worth circulating\" and so, at the initiative of Lord Curzon, it was transferred from the Admiralty to the Foreign Office. GC&CS came under the supervision of Hugh Sinclair, who by 1923 was both the Chief of SIS and Director of GC&CS. In 1925, both organisations were co-located on different floors of Broadway Buildings, opposite St. James's Park. Messages decrypted by GC&CS were distributed in blue-jacketed files that became known as \"BJs\".\n\nIn the 1920s, GC&CS was successfully reading Soviet Union diplomatic ciphers. However, in May 1927, during a row over clandestine Soviet support for the General Strike and the distribution of subversive propaganda, Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin made details from the decrypts public.\n\nDuring the Second World War, GC&CS was based largely at Bletchley Park in present-day Milton Keynes working on, most famously, the German Enigma machine and Lorenz ciphers, but also a large number of other systems. In 1940, GC&CS was working on the diplomatic codes and ciphers of 26 countries, tackling over 150 diplomatic cryptosystems. Senior staff included Alastair Denniston, Oliver Strachey, Dilly Knox, John Tiltman, Edward Travis, Ernst Fetterlein, Josh Cooper, Donald Michie, Alan Turing, Joan Clarke, Max Newman, William Tutte, I. J. (Jack) Good, Peter Calvocoressi and Hugh Foss.\n\nAn outstation in the Far East, the Far East Combined Bureau was set up in Hong Kong in 1935, and moved to Singapore in 1939. Subsequently, with the Japanese advance down the Malay Peninsula, the Army and RAF codebreakers went to the Wireless Experimental Centre in Delhi, India. The Navy codebreakers in FECB went to Colombo, Ceylon, then to Kilindini, near Mombasa, Kenya.\n\nGC&CS was renamed the \"Government Communications Headquarters\" in June 1946.\n\nGCHQ was at first based in Eastcote, but in 1951 moved to the outskirts of Cheltenham, setting up two sites there – Oakley and Benhall. Duncan Campbell and Mark Hosenball revealed the existence of GCHQ in 1976 in an article for Time Out; GCHQ retaliated by forcibly deporting Hosenball from the UK. GCHQ had a very low profile in the media until 1983 when the trial of Geoffrey Prime, a KGB mole within GCHQ, created considerable media interest.\n\nSince the days of the Second World War, US and British intelligence have shared information. For the GCHQ this means that it shares information with, and gets information from, the National Security Agency (NSA) in the United States.\n\nEarly in the 1970s, the concept for public key encryption was developed and proven by James H. Ellis, a GCHQ staff member since 1952, who lacked the necessary number theory expertise necessary to build a workable system. Subsequently a feasible implementation scheme via an asymmetric key algorithm was invented by another staff member Clifford Cocks, a mathematics graduate. This fact was kept secret until 1997.\n\nIn 1984, GCHQ was the centre of a political row when the Conservative government of Margaret Thatcher prohibited its employees from belonging to a trade union. It was claimed that joining a union would be in conflict with national security. A number of mass national one-day strikes were held to protest this decision, seen as a first step to wider bans on trade unions. Appeals to British Courts and European Commission of Human Rights were unsuccessful. The government offered a sum of money to each employee who agreed to give up their union membership. Appeal to the ILO resulted in a decision that government's actions were in violation of Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise Convention. The ban was eventually lifted by the incoming Labour government in 1997, with the Government Communications Group of the Public and Commercial Services (PCS) Union being formed to represent interested employees at all grades. In 2000, a group of 14 former GCHQ employees, who had been dismissed after refusing to give up their union membership, were offered re-employment, which three of them accepted.\n\nThe Intelligence Services Act 1994 placed the activities of the intelligence agencies on a legal footing for the first time, defining their purpose, and the British Parliament's Intelligence and Security Committee was given a remit to examine the expenditure, administration and policy of the three intelligence agencies. The objectives of GCHQ were defined as working as \"in the interests of national security, with particular reference to the defence and foreign policies of Her Majesty's government; in the interests of the economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom; and in support of the prevention and the detection of serious crime\". During the introduction of the Intelligence Agency Act in late 1993, the former Prime Minister Jim Callaghan had described GCHQ as a \"full blown bureaucracy\", adding that future bodies created to provide oversight of the intelligence agencies should \"investigate whether all the functions that GCHQ carries out today are still necessary.\"\n\nIn 1993, in the wake of the \"Squidgygate\" affair, GCHQ denied \"intercepting, recording or disclosing\" the telephone calls of the British Royal family.\n\nIn late 1993 civil servant Michael Quinlan advised a deep review of the work of GCHQ following the conclusion of his \"Review of Intelligence Requirements and Resources\", which had imposed a 3% cut on the agency. The Chief Secretary to the Treasury, Jonathan Aitken, subsequently held face to face discussions with the intelligence agency directors to assess further savings in the wake of Quinlan's review. Aldrich (2010) suggests that Sir John Adye, the then Director of GCHQ performed badly in meetings with Aitken, leading Aitken to conclude that GCHQ was \"suffering from out-of-date methods of management and out-of-date methods for assessing priorities\". GCHQ's budget was £850 million in 1993, (£ as of ) compared to £125 million for MI5 and SIS. In December 1994 the businessman Roger Hurn was commissioned to begin a review of GCHQ, which was concluded in March 1995. Hurn's report recommended a cut of £100 million in GCHQ's budget, such a large reduction had not been suffered by any British intelligence agency since the end of World War II. The J Division of GCHQ, which had collected SIGINT on Russia, disappeared as result of the cuts. The cuts had been mostly reversed by 2000 in the wake of threats from violent non-state actors, and risks from increased terrorism, organised crime and illegal access to nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.\n\nDavid Omand became the Director of GCHQ in 1996, and greatly restructured the agency in the face of new and changing targets and rapid technological change. Omand introduced the concept of \"Sinews\" (or \"SIGINT New Systems\") which allowed more flexible working methods, avoiding overlaps in work by creating fourteen domains, each with a well-defined working scope. The tenure of Omand also saw the planning and the creation of The Doughnut, GCHQ's modern headquarters. Located on a 176-acre site in Benhall, near Cheltenham, The Doughnut would be the largest building constructed for secret intelligence operations outside the United States.\n\nOperations at GCHQ’s Chum Hom Kwok listening station in Hong Kong ended in 1994. GCHQ's Hong Kong operations were extremely important to their relationship with the NSA, who contributed investment and equipment to the station. In anticipation of the transfer of Hong Kong to the Chinese government in 1997, the Hong Kong stations operations were moved to Geraldton in Australia.\n\nOperations that utilised GCHQ's intelligence-gathering capabilities in the 1990s included the monitoring of communications of Iraqi soldiers in the Gulf War, of dissident republican terrorists and the Real IRA, of the various factions involved in the Yugoslav Wars, and of the criminal Kenneth Noye. In the mid 1990s GCHQ began to assist in the investigation of cybercrime.\n\nAt the end of 2003, GCHQ moved to a new circular HQ (popularly known as \"The Doughnut\"): at the time, it was the second-largest public-sector building project in Europe, with an estimated cost of £337 million. The new building, which was designed by Gensler and constructed by Carillion, is the base for all of GCHQ's Cheltenham operations.\n\nThe public spotlight fell on GCHQ in late 2003 and early 2004 following the sacking of Katharine Gun after she leaked to \"The Observer\" a confidential email from agents at the United States' National Security Agency addressed to GCHQ agents about the wiretapping of UN delegates in the run-up to the 2003 Iraq war.\n\nGCHQ gains its intelligence by monitoring a wide variety of communications and other electronic signals. For this, a number of stations have been established in the UK and overseas. The listening stations are at Cheltenham itself, Bude, Scarborough, Ascension Island, and with the United States at Menwith Hill. Ayios Nikolaos Station in Cyprus is run by the British Army for GCHQ.\n\nIn March 2010, GCHQ was criticised by the Intelligence and Security Committee for problems with its IT security practices and failing to meet its targets for work targeted against cyber attacks.\n\nAs revealed by Edward Snowden in \"The Guardian\", GCHQ spied on foreign politicians visiting the 2009 G-20 London Summit by eavesdropping phonecalls and emails and monitoring their computers, and in some cases even ongoing after the summit via keyloggers that had been installed during the summit. Some of the information gained has been passed on to British politicians.\n\nAccording to Edward Snowden, GCHQ has two principal umbrella programs for collecting communications:\n\nGCHQ also has had access to the US internet monitoring programme PRISM since at least June 2010. PRISM is said to give the National Security Agency and FBI easy access to the systems of nine of the world's top internet companies, including Google, Facebook, Microsoft, Apple, Yahoo, and Skype.\n\nIn February 2014, \"The Guardian\", based on documents provided by Snowden, revealed that GCHQ had indiscriminately collected 1.8 million private Yahoo webcam images from users across the world. In the same month NBC and The Intercept, based on documents released by Snowden, revealed the Joint Threat Research Intelligence Group and the CNE units within GCHQ. Their mission was cyber operations based on \"dirty tricks\" to shut down enemy communications, discredit, and plant misinformation on enemies. These operations were 5% of all GCHQ operations according to a conference slideshow presented by the GCHQ.\n\nSoon after becoming Director of GCHQ in 2014, Robert Hannigan wrote an article in the \"Financial Times\" on the topic of internet surveillance, stating that \"however much [large US technology companies] may dislike it, they have become the command and control networks of choice for terrorists and criminals\" and that GCHQ and its sister agencies \"cannot tackle these challenges at scale without greater support from the private sector\", arguing that most internet users \"would be comfortable with a better and more sustainable relationship between the [intelligence] agencies and the tech companies\". Since the 2013 global surveillance disclosures, large US technology companies have improved security and become less co-operative with foreign intelligence agencies, including those of the UK, generally requiring a US court order before disclosing data. However the head of the UK technology industry group techUK rejected these claims, stating that they understood the issues but that disclosure obligations \"must be based upon a clear and transparent legal framework and effective oversight rather than, as suggested, a deal between the industry and government\".\n\nIn 2015, another secret program called Karma Police was revealed by Snowden. The same year GCHQ has admitted for the first time in court that it conducts computer hacking.\n\nCESG (originally Communications-Electronics Security Group) is the group within GCHQ which provides assistance to government departments on their own communications security: CESG is the UK National Technical Authority for information assurance, including cryptography. CESG does not manufacture security equipment, but works with industry to ensure the availability of suitable products and services, while GCHQ itself can fund research into such areas, for example to the Centre for Quantum Computing at Oxford University and the Heilbronn Institute at the University of Bristol.\n\nCESG runs a number of assurance schemes such as CHECK, CLAS, Commercial Product Assurance (CPA) and CESG Assisted Products Service (CAPS).\n\nThe Joint Technical Language Service (JTLS) was established in 1955, drawing on members of the small Ministry of Defence technical language team and others, initially to provide standard English translations for organisational expressions in any foreign language, discover the correct English equivalents of technical terms in foreign languages and discover the correct expansions of abbreviations in any language. The remit of the JTLS has expanded in the ensuing years to cover technical language support and interpreting and translation services across the UK Government and to local public sector services in Gloucestershire and surrounding counties. The JTLS also produces and publishes foreign language working aids under crown copyright and conducts research into machine translation and on-line dictionaries and glossaries.\n\nThe JTLS is co-located with GCHQ for administrative purposes.\n\nGCHQ operates in partnership with equivalent agencies worldwide in a number of bi-lateral and multi-lateral relationships. The principal of these is with the United States (National Security Agency), Canada (Communications Security Establishment), Australia (Australian Signals Directorate) and New Zealand (Government Communications Security Bureau), through the mechanism of the UK-US Security Agreement, a broad intelligence-sharing agreement encompassing a range of intelligence collection methods.\n\nRelationships are alleged to include shared collection methods, such as the system described in the popular media as ECHELON, as well as analysed product.\n\nGCHQ's legal basis is enshrined in the Intelligence Services Act 1994 Section 3 as follows:\n\nActivities that involve interception of communications are permitted under the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000; this kind of interception can only be carried out after a warrant has been issued by a Secretary of State. The Human Rights Act 1998 requires the intelligence agencies, including GCHQ, to respect citizens' rights as described in the European Convention on Human Rights.\n\nThe Prime Minister nominates cross-party Members of Parliament to an Intelligence and Security Committee. The remit of the Committee includes oversight of intelligence and security activities and reports are made directly to Parliament. Its functions were increased under the Justice and Security Act 2013 to provide for further access and investigatory powers.\n\nJudicial oversight of GCHQ's conduct is exercised by the Investigatory Powers Tribunal. The UK also has an independent Intelligence Services Commissioner and Interception of Communications Commissioner, both of whom are former senior judges.\n\nThe Investigatory Powers Tribunal ruled in December 2014 that GCHQ does not breach the European Convention of Human Rights, and that its activities are compliant with Articles 8 (right to privacy) and 10 (freedom of expression) of the European Convention of Human Rights. However, the Tribunal stated in February 2015 that one particular aspect, the data-sharing arrangement that allowed UK Intelligence services to request data from the US surveillance programmes Prism and Upstream, had been in contravention of human rights law prior to this until two paragraphs of additional information, providing details about the procedures and safeguards, were disclosed to the public in December 2014.\n\nFurthermore, the IPT ruled that the legislative framework in the United Kingdom does not permit mass surveillance and that while GCHQ collects and analyses data in bulk, it does not practice mass surveillance. This complements independent reports by the Interception of Communications Commissioner, and a special report made by the Intelligence and Security Committee of Parliament; although several shortcomings and potential improvements to both oversight and the legislative framework were highlighted.\n\nDespite the inherent secrecy around much of GCHQ's work, investigations carried out by the UK government after the Snowden disclosures have admitted various abuses by the security services. A report by the Intelligence and Security Committee (ISC) in 2015 revealed that a small number of staff at UK intelligence agencies had been found to misuse their surveillance powers, in one case leading to the dismissal of a member of staff at GCHQ, although there were no laws in place at the time to make these abuses a criminal offence.\n\nLater that year, a ruling by the IPT found that GCHQ acted unlawfully in conducting surveillance on two human rights organisations. The closed hearing found the government in breach of its internal surveillance policies in accessing and retaining the communications of the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights and the Legal Resources Centre in South Africa. This was only the second time in the IPT's history that it has made a positive determination in favour of applicants after a closed session.\n\nAt another IPT case in 2015, GCHQ conceded that \"from January 2010, the regime for the interception/obtaining, analysis, use, disclosure and destruction of legally privileged material has not been in accordance with the law for the purposes of Article 8(2) of the European convention on human rights and was accordingly unlawful\". This admission was made in connection with a case brought against them by Abdel Hakim Belhaj, a Libyan opponent of the former Gaddafi regime, and his wife Fatima Bouchar. The couple accused British ministers and officials of participating in their unlawful abduction, kidnapping and removal to Libya in March 2004, while Gaddafi was still in power.\n\nIt was further reported in 2015 that British intelligence services, including GCHQ, had been spying on MPs in defiance of laws prohibiting it. GCHQ had introduced a policy in March of 2015 that did not require approval by the Prime Minister, or any Minister, before deliberately targeting the communications of a parliamentarian. This is despite then-Home Secretary, Theresa May, telling Parliament in 2014 that \"Obviously, the Wilson doctrine applies to parliamentarians.\"\n\nA controversial GCHQ case determined the scope of judicial review of prerogative powers (the Crown's residual powers under common law). This was \"Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil Service\" [1985] AC 374 (often known simply as the \"GCHQ case\"). In this case, a prerogative Order in Council had been used by the prime minister (who is the Minister for the Civil Service) to ban trade union activities by civil servants working at GCHQ. This order was issued without consultation. The House of Lords had to decide whether this was reviewable by judicial review. It was held that executive action is not immune from judicial review simply because it uses powers derived from common law rather than statute (thus the prerogative is reviewable). Controversially, they also held that although the failure to consult was unfair, this was overridden by concerns of national security.\n\nThe following is a list of the heads of the operational heads of GCHQ and GC&CS:\n\n\nThe following are the stations and former stations that continued to operate through the Cold War:\n\nThe historical drama \"The Imitation Game\" featured Benedict Cumberbatch portraying Alan Turing's efforts to break the Enigma code as part of the Government Code and Cypher School, the forerunner of GCHQ.\n\n\n\n", "id": "12884", "title": "Government Communications Headquarters"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12888", "text": "Francis Gary Powers\n\nFrancis Gary Powers (17 August 1929 – 1 August 1977) – often referred to as simply Gary Powers – was an American pilot whose Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) U-2 spy plane was shot down while flying a reconnaissance mission in Soviet Union airspace, causing the 1960 U-2 incident.\n\nPowers was born August 17, 1929, in either Jenkins, Kentucky, or Burdine, Kentucky, the son of Oliver Winfield Powers (1904–1970), a coal miner, and his wife Ida Melinda Powers (; 1905–1991). His family eventually moved to Pound, Virginia, just across the state border. He was the second born and only male of six children. His family lived in a mining town, and because of the hardships associated with the life in such a town, his father wanted Powers to become a doctor. He hoped his son would achieve the higher earnings of such a profession and felt the life of a doctor would involve less hardship than any job in his hometown.\n\nGraduating from Milligan College in Tennessee in June 1950, he enlisted in the Air Force in October. He was commissioned as a Second Lieutenant in the United States Air Force in December 1952 after completing his advanced training with USAF Pilot Training Class 52-H at Williams Air Force Base, Arizona. Powers was then assigned to the 468th Strategic Fighter Squadron at Turner Air Force Base, Georgia, as an F-84 Thunderjet pilot. In January 1956 he was recruited by the CIA. He married Barbara Gay Moore in April 1956. In May 1956 he began U-2 training at Watertown Strip, Nevada. His training was complete by August 1956 and his unit, the Second Weather Observational Squadron (Provisional) or Detachment 10-10, was deployed to Incirlik Air Base, Turkey. By 1960, Powers was already a veteran of many covert aerial reconnaissance missions.\n\nPowers was discharged from the Air Force in 1956 with the rank of captain. He then joined the CIA's U-2 program at the civilian grade of GS-12. U-2 pilots flew espionage missions at altitudes above , above the reach of Soviet air defenses. The U-2 was equipped with a state-of-the-art camera designed to take high-resolution photos from the edge of the stratosphere over hostile countries, including the Soviet Union. U-2 missions systematically photographed military installations and other important sites.\n\n\"The primary mission of the U-2s was overflying Russia. The border surveillance and atomic sampling, though vital, were secondary.\" Additionally, the U-2 flew \"special missions\". \"If there was a trouble spot in the Middle East, the U-2s observed it.\" Beginning on 27 September 1956 and continuing until 1960, \"the United States was spying not only on most of the countries in the Middle East but also on her own allies.\" These included France, the United Kingdom, and Israel during the Suez Crisis.\n\nSoviet intelligence had been aware of encroaching U-2 flights at least since 1958, if not sooner, after they started in 1956. but lacked effective countermeasures until 1960. On 1 May 1960, Powers' U-2 departed from a military airbase in Peshawar, Pakistan, with support from the U.S. Air Station at Badaber (Peshawar Air Station). This was to be the first attempt \"to fly all the way across the Soviet Union...but it was considered worth the gamble. The planned route would take us deeper into Russia than we had ever gone, while traversing important targets never before photographed.\" \n\nPowers was shot down by an S-75 Dvina (SA-2 Guideline) surface-to-air missile over Sverdlovsk. A total of fourteen were launched, one of which hit a MiG-19 jet fighter which was sent to intercept the U-2 but could not reach a high enough altitude. Its pilot, Sergei Safronov, ejected but died of his injuries. Another Soviet aircraft, a newly manufactured Su-9 in transit flight, also attempted to intercept Powers' U-2. The unarmed Su-9 was directed to ram the U-2 but missed because of the large differences in speed (the Su-9 flew above Mach 1.1, while the U-2 flew at approximately Mach 0.6).\n\n\"What was left of the plane began spinning, only upside down, the nose pointing upward toward the sky, the tail down toward the ground.\" Powers was unable to activate the plane's self-destruct mechanism before he was thrown out of the plane after releasing the canopy and his seat belt. While descending under his parachute, Powers had time to scatter his escape map, and rid himself of the US dollar coin, keeping the poison pin. \"Yet I was still hopeful of escape.\" He hit the ground hard, was immediately captured, and taken to Lubyanka Prison in Moscow. Powers did note a second chute after landing on the ground, \"some distance away and very high, a lone red and white parachute\". \n\nWhen the U.S. government learned of Powers' disappearance over the Soviet Union, they issued a cover statement claiming a \"weather plane\" had strayed off course after its pilot had \"difficulties with his oxygen equipment\". What CIA officials did not realize was that the plane crashed almost fully intact, and the Soviets recovered its equipment. Powers was interrogated extensively by the KGB for months before he made a confession and a public apology for his part in espionage.\n\nPowers tried to limit the information he shared with the KGB to that which could be determined from the remains of his plane's wreckage. He was hampered by information appearing in the western press. A KGB major stated \"there's no reason for you to withhold information. We'll find it out anyway. Your press will give it to us.\" However, he limited his divulging of CIA contacts to one individual, with a pseudonym of \"Collins\". At the same time, he repeatedly stated the maximum altitude for the U-2 was , significantly lower than its actual flight ceiling.\n\nThe incident set back talks between Khrushchev and Eisenhower. Powers' interrogations ended on 30 June, and his solitary confinement on 9 July. On 17 August 1960, his trial for espionage began before the military division of the Supreme Court of the USSR. Three generals, Lieutenant General Borisoglebsky, Major General Vorobyev, and Major General Zakharov presided. Roman Rudenko acted as prosecutor in his capacity of Procurator General of the Soviet Union. Mikhail I. Grinev served as Powers' defense counsel. In attendance were Gary's parents and sister, plus Barbara and her mother. Gary's father brought along his local attorney, Carl McAfee, while the CIA provided two additional attorneys.\n\nOn 19 August 1960, Powers was convicted of espionage, \"a grave crime covered by Article 2 of the Soviet Union's law 'On Criminality Responsibility for State Crimes'\". His sentence consisted of ten years confinement, three of which in a prison, the remainder in a labor camp. The US Embassy \"News Bulletin\" stated, according to Powers, \"as far as the government was concerned, I had acted in accordance with the instructions given me and would receive my full salary while imprisoned\".\n\nHe was held in Vladimir Central Prison, about east of Moscow, in building number 2 from 9 September 1960 until 8 February 1962. His cell mate was Zigurd Kruminsh, a Latvian political prisoner. Gary kept a diary and a journal while confined. Additionally he took up carpet weaving from his cell mate to pass the time. He could send and receive a limited number of letters from his family. However, Gary was distracted by his wife Barbara's drinking and infidelities. In fact, at one time, Barbara was hospitalized and treated by Corbett Thigpen. The prison now contains a small museum with an exhibit on Powers, who allegedly developed a good rapport with Russian prisoners there. Some pieces of the plane and Powers' uniform are on display at the Monino Airbase museum near Moscow.\n\nOn 10 February 1962, Powers was exchanged, along with American student Frederic Pryor, in a well-publicized spy swap at the Glienicke Bridge in Berlin. The exchange was for Soviet KGB Colonel Vilyam Fisher, known as \"Rudolf Abel\", who had been caught by the FBI and tried and jailed for espionage. Powers credited his father with the swap idea. When released, Powers' total time in captivity was 1 year, 9 months and 10 days.\n\nIn 2010, CIA documents were released indicating that American officials did not believe Powers' account of the incident at the time, because it was contradicted by a classified National Security Agency (NSA) report which alleged that the U-2 had descended from before changing course and disappearing from radar. However, newly released declassified CIA documents confirm the accuracy of Powers' report. The NSA report remains classified.\n\nPowers initially received a cold reception on his return home. He was criticized for having failed to activate his aircraft's self-destruct charge to destroy the camera, photographic film, and related classified parts of his aircraft before his capture. He was also criticized for not using an optional CIA-issued \"suicide pill\" (later revealed, during CIA testimony to the Church Committee in 1975 to be a coin with shellfish toxin embedded in its grooves) to kill himself.\n\nAfter being debriefed extensively by the CIA, Lockheed, and the Air Force, a statement was issued stating, \"Mr. Powers lived up to the terms of his employment and instructions in connection with his mission and in his obligations as an American.\" On 6 March 1962, Powers appeared before a Senate Armed Services Select Committee hearing chaired by Senator Richard Russell and including Senators Prescott Bush, Leverett Saltonstall, Robert Byrd, Margaret Chase Smith, John Stennis, Strom Thurmond, and Barry Goldwater, Sr. During the hearing, Senator Saltonstall stated, \"I commend you as a courageous, fine young American citizen who lived up to your instructions and who did the best you could under very difficult circumstances.\" While Senator Bush declared, \"I am satisfied he has conducted himself in exemplary fashion and in accordance with the highest traditions of service to one's country, and I congratulate him upon his conduct in captivity...\" Finally, Senator Goldwater sent Powers a handwritten note stating, \"You did a good job for your country.\"\n\nIn January 1963, he divorced his wife Barbara. He started a relationship with Claudia Edwards \"Sue\" Downey, whom he had met while working briefly at CIA Headquarters. They were married on 21 October 1963. Their son Francis Gary Powers, II, was born on 5 June 1965.\n\nDuring a speech in March 1964, former CIA Director Allen Dulles said of Powers, \"He performed his duty in a very dangerous mission and he performed it well, and I think I know more about that than some of his detractors and critics know, and I am glad to say that to him tonight.\"\n\nPowers worked for Lockheed as a test pilot from 1962 to 1970, though the CIA paid his salary. In 1970, he published \"Operation Overflight\". Lockheed fired him, because\n\"the book's publication had ruffled some feathers at Langley.\" Powers became a helicopter traffic pilot reporter for KNBC News Channel 4.\n\nOn August 1, 1977, while conducting a traffic report over Los Angeles, his helicopter crashed, killing him and George Spears, his cameraman. Powers had been covering brush fires in Santa Barbara County in the KNBC helicopter and was heading back from flying over them. As he returned, his Bell 206 Jet Ranger helicopter, registered N4TV, ran out of fuel and crashed at the Sepulveda Dam recreational area in nearby Encino, several miles short of its intended landing site at Burbank Airport, killing Powers instantly. The National Transportation Safety Board report attributed the probable cause of the crash to pilot error (poor fuel management). According to Powers' son, an aviation mechanic had repaired a faulty fuel gauge without telling Powers, who misread it. At the last moment he noticed children playing in the area, and directed the helicopter elsewhere to avoid landing on them. If not for the last-second deviation, which compromised his autorotative descent, he might have landed safely.\nPowers was survived by his wife, two children, Dee and Francis Gary Powers Jr., and five sisters. Powers is buried in Arlington National Cemetery as an Air Force veteran.\n\nPowers received the CIA's Intelligence Star in 1965 after his return from the Soviet Union. Powers was originally scheduled to receive it in 1963 along with other pilots involved in the CIA's U-2 program, but the award was postponed for political reasons. In 1970, Powers published his first – and only – book review, on a work about aerial reconnaissance, \"Unarmed and Unafraid\" by Glenn Infield, in the monthly magazine \"Business & Commercial Aviation\". \"The subject has great interest to me,\" he said, in submitting his review.\n\nIn 1998, newly declassified information revealed that Powers's mission had been a joint USAF/CIA operation. In 2000, on the 40th anniversary of the U-2 Incident, his family was presented with his posthumously awarded Prisoner of War Medal, Distinguished Flying Cross, and National Defense Service Medal. In addition, CIA Director George Tenet authorized Powers to posthumously receive the CIA's coveted Director's Medal for extreme fidelity and extraordinary courage in the line of duty.\n\nOn 15 June 2012, Powers was posthumously awarded the Silver Star medal for \"demonstrating 'exceptional loyalty' while enduring harsh interrogation in the Lubyanka Prison in Moscow for almost two years.\" Air Force Chief of Staff General Norton Schwartz presented the decoration to Powers's grandchildren, Trey Powers, 9, and Lindsey Berry, 29, in a Pentagon ceremony.\n\nPowers' son, Francis Gary Powers Jr., founded the Cold War Museum in 1996. Affiliated with the Smithsonian Institution, it was essentially a traveling exhibit until it found a permanent home in 2011 on a former Army communications base outside Washington.\n\n\n\n", "id": "12888", "title": "Francis Gary Powers"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12890", "text": "Gospel of James\n\nThe Gospel of James, also known as the Infancy Gospel of James or the Protoevangelium of James, is an apocryphal Gospel probably written about AD 145, which expands backward in time the infancy stories contained in the Gospels of Matthew and Luke, and presents a narrative concerning the birth and upbringing of Mary herself. It is the oldest source to assert the virginity of Mary not only prior to but during (and after) the birth of Jesus. The ancient manuscripts that preserve the book have different titles, including \"The Birth of Mary\", \"The Story of the Birth of Saint Mary, Mother of God,\" and \"The Birth of Mary; The Revelation of James.\"\n\nThe document presents itself as written by James: \"I, James, wrote this history in Jerusalem.\" The purported author is thus James, the brother of Jesus, but scholars have established that the work was not written by the person to whom it is attributed. \n\nThat conclusion is based on the style of the language and the fact that the author describes certain activities as contemporary Jewish customs that probably did not exist. For example, the work suggests there were consecrated temple virgins in Judaism, similar to the Vestal Virgins in pagan Rome, but that is never directly stated to have been a practice in mainstream Judaism. Conversely, some Eastern Orthodox Christians and Roman Catholics argue that the Old Testament shows that the idea of Mary being a consecrated virgin is plausible and claim the practice of consecrated virginity was within Judaism since the days of the prophet Samuel (), and until the time of the Maccabees (). However the text of Samuel does not specify that the women working within the temple were virgins. Also, while the text from Second Maccabees mentions \"young women\" it does not state them to be assigned to the temple. A similar claim is also made by a number of Rabbinic sources.\n\nThe consensus is that it was actually composed some time in the 2nd century. The first mention of it is by Origen of Alexandria in the early 3rd century, who says the text, like that of a Gospel of Peter, was of dubious, recent appearance and shared with that book the claim that the \"brethren of the Lord\" were sons of Joseph by a former wife.\n\nSome indication of the popularity of the \"Infancy Gospel of James\" may be drawn from the fact that over 150 Greek manuscripts containing it have survived. The \"Gospel of James\" was translated into Syriac, Ethiopic, Coptic, Georgian, Old Slavonic, Armenian, Arabic, Irish and Latin. Though no early Latin versions are known, it was relegated to the apocrypha in the Gelasian decretal, so it must have been known in the West by the fifth century though the vast majority of the manuscripts come from the 10th century or later. The earliest known manuscript of the text, a papyrus dating to the third or early 4th century, was found in 1958; it is kept in the Bodmer Library, Geneva (Papyrus Bodmer 5). Of the surviving Greek manuscripts, the fullest text is a 10th-century codex in the Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris (Paris 1454).\n\nThe Gospel of James is one of several surviving Infancy Gospels that give an idea of the miracle literature that was created to satisfy the hunger of early Christians for more detail about the early life of their Saviour. In Greek such an infancy gospel was termed a \"protevangelion\", a \"pre-Gospel\" narrating events of Jesus' life before those recorded in the four canonical gospels. Such a work was intended to be \"apologetic, doctrinal, or simply to satisfy one's curiosity\". The literary genre that these works represent shows stylistic features that suggest dates in the 2nd century and later. Other infancy gospels in this tradition include The Infancy Gospel of Thomas, the Gospel of Pseudo-Matthew (based on the Protevangelium of James and on the Infancy Gospel of Thomas), and the so-called Arabic Infancy Gospel; all of which were regarded by the Church as apocryphal.\n\nThe Gospel of James is in three equal parts, of eight chapters each:\n\nOne of the work's high points is the Lament of Anna. A primary theme is the work and grace of God in Mary's life, Mary's personal purity, and her perpetual virginity before, during and after the birth of Jesus, as confirmed by the midwife after she gave birth, and tested by Salome who is perhaps intended to be Salome, later the disciple of Jesus who is mentioned in the Gospel of Mark as being one of the women at the crucifixion.\n\nThis is also the earliest text that explicitly claims that Joseph was a widower, with children, at the time that Mary is entrusted to his care. This feature is mentioned in the text of Origen, who adduces it to demonstrate that the 'brethren of the Lord' were sons of Joseph by a former wife.\n\nAmong further traditions not present in the four canonical gospels are the birth of Jesus in a cave, the martyrdom of John the Baptist's father Zechariah during the Massacre of the Innocents and Joseph's being elderly when Jesus was born. The Nativity reported as taking place in a cave remained in the popular imagination; many Early Renaissance Sienese and Florentine paintings of the Nativity continued to show such a setting, which is practically universal in Byzantine, Greek and Russian icons of the Nativity.\n\n\n", "id": "12890", "title": "Gospel of James"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12891", "text": "Gene therapy\n\nGene therapy is the therapeutic delivery of nucleic acid polymers into a patient's cells as a drug to treat disease. The first attempt at modifying human DNA was performed in 1980 by Martin Cline, but the first successful and approved nuclear gene transfer in humans was performed in May 1989. The first therapeutic use of gene transfer as well as the first direct insertion of human DNA into the nuclear genome was performed by French Anderson in a trial starting in September 1990.\n\nBetween 1989 and February 2016, over 2,300 clinical trials had been conducted, more than half of them in phase I.\n\nIt should be noted that not all medical procedures that introduce alterations to a patient's genetic makeup can be considered gene therapy. Bone marrow transplantation and organ transplants in general have been found to introduce foreign DNA into patients. Gene therapy is defined by the precision of the procedure and the intention of direct therapeutic effects.\n\nGene therapy was conceptualized in 1972, by authors who urged caution before commencing human gene therapy studies.\n\nThe first attempt, an unsuccessful one, at gene therapy (as well as the first case of medical transfer of foreign genes into humans not counting organ transplantation) was performed by Martin Cline on 10 July 1980. Cline claimed that one of the genes in his patients was active six months later, though he never published this data or had it verified and even if he is correct, it's unlikely it produced any significant beneficial effects treating beta-thalassemia.\n\nAfter extensive research on animals throughout the 1980s and a 1989 bacterial gene tagging trial on humans, the first gene therapy widely accepted as a success was demonstrated in a trial that started on 14 September 1990, when Ashi DeSilva was treated for ADA-SCID.\n\nThe first somatic treatment that produced a permanent genetic change was performed in 1993.\n\nThis procedure was referred to sensationally and somewhat inaccurately in the media as a \"three parent baby\", though mtDNA is not the primary human genome and has little effect on an organism's individual characteristics beyond powering their cells.\n\nGene therapy is a way to fix a genetic problem at its source. The polymers are either translated into proteins, interfere with target gene expression, or possibly correct genetic mutations.\n\nThe most common form uses DNA that encodes a functional, therapeutic gene to replace a mutated gene. The polymer molecule is packaged within a \"vector\", which carries the molecule inside cells.\n\nEarly clinical failures led to dismissals of gene therapy. Clinical successes since 2006 regained researchers' attention, although as of 2014, it was still largely an experimental technique. These include treatment of retinal diseases Leber's congenital amaurosis and choroideremia, X-linked SCID, ADA-SCID, adrenoleukodystrophy, chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL), multiple myeloma, haemophilia and Parkinson's disease. Between 2013 and April 2014, US companies invested over $600 million in the field.\n\nThe first commercial gene therapy, Gendicine, was approved in China in 2003 for the treatment of certain cancers. In 2011 Neovasculgen was registered in Russia as the first-in-class gene-therapy drug for treatment of peripheral artery disease, including critical limb ischemia.\nIn 2012 Glybera, a treatment for a rare inherited disorder, became the first treatment to be approved for clinical use in either Europe or the United States after its endorsement by the European Commission.\n\nFollowing early advances in genetic engineering of bacteria, cells, and small animals, scientists started considering how to apply it to medicine. Two main approaches were considered – replacing or disrupting defective genes. Scientists focused on diseases caused by single-gene defects, such as cystic fibrosis, haemophilia, muscular dystrophy, thalassemia and sickle cell anemia. Glybera treats one such disease, caused by a defect in lipoprotein lipase.\n\nDNA must be administered, reach the damaged cells, enter the cell and express/disrupt a protein. Multiple delivery techniques have been explored. The initial approach incorporated DNA into an engineered virus to deliver the DNA into a chromosome. Naked DNA approaches have also been explored, especially in the context of vaccine development.\n\nGenerally, efforts focused on administering a gene that causes a needed protein to be expressed. More recently, increased understanding of nuclease function has led to more direct DNA editing, using techniques such as zinc finger nucleases and CRISPR. The vector incorporates genes into chromosomes. The expressed nucleases then knock out and replace genes in the chromosome. As of 2014 these approaches involve removing cells from patients, editing a chromosome and returning the transformed cells to patients.\n\nGene editing is a potential approach to alter the human genome to treat genetic diseases, viral diseases, and cancer. As of 2016 these approaches were still years from being medicine.\n\nGene therapy may be classified into two types:\n\nIn somatic cell gene therapy (SCGT), the therapeutic genes are transferred into any cell other than a gamete, germ cell, gametocyte or undifferentiated stem cell. Any such modifications affect the individual patient only, and are not inherited by offspring. Somatic gene therapy represents mainstream basic and clinical research, in which therapeutic DNA (either integrated in the genome or as an external episome or plasmid) is used to treat disease.\n\nOver 600 clinical trials utilizing SCGT are underway in the US. Most focus on severe genetic disorders, including immunodeficiencies, haemophilia, thalassaemia and cystic fibrosis. Such single gene disorders are good candidates for somatic cell therapy. The complete correction of a genetic disorder or the replacement of multiple genes is not yet possible. Only a few of the trials are in the advanced stages.\n\nIn germline gene therapy (GGT), germ cells (sperm or eggs) are modified by the introduction of functional genes into their genomes. Modifying a germ cell causes all the organism's cells to contain the modified gene. The change is therefore heritable and passed on to later generations. Australia, Canada, Germany, Israel, Switzerland and the Netherlands prohibit GGT for application in human beings, for technical and ethical reasons, including insufficient knowledge about possible risks to future generations and higher risks versus SCGT. The US has no federal controls specifically addressing human genetic modification (beyond FDA regulations for therapies in general).\n\nThe delivery of DNA into cells can be accomplished by multiple methods. The two major classes are recombinant viruses (sometimes called biological nanoparticles or viral vectors) and naked DNA or DNA complexes (non-viral methods).\n\nIn order to replicate, viruses introduce their genetic material into the host cell, tricking the host's cellular machinery into using it as blueprints for viral proteins. Scientists exploit this by substituting a virus's genetic material with therapeutic DNA. (The term 'DNA' may be an oversimplification, as some viruses contain RNA, and gene therapy could take this form as well.) A number of viruses have been used for human gene therapy, including retrovirus, adenovirus, lentivirus, herpes simplex, vaccinia and adeno-associated virus. Like the genetic material (DNA or RNA) in viruses, therapeutic DNA can be designed to simply serve as a temporary blueprint that is degraded naturally or (at least theoretically) to enter the host's genome, becoming a permanent part of the host's DNA in infected cells.\n\nNon-viral methods present certain advantages over viral methods, such as large scale production and low host immunogenicity. However, non-viral methods initially produced lower levels of transfection and gene expression, and thus lower therapeutic efficacy. Later technology remedied this deficiency.\n\nMethods for non-viral gene therapy include the injection of naked DNA, electroporation, the gene gun, sonoporation, magnetofection, the use of oligonucleotides, lipoplexes, dendrimers, and inorganic nanoparticles.\n\nSome of the unsolved problems include:\n\nThree patients' deaths have been reported in gene therapy trials, putting the field under close scrutiny. The first was that of Jesse Gelsinger in 1999. One X-SCID patient died of leukemia in 2003. In 2007, a rheumatoid arthritis patient died from an infection; the subsequent investigation concluded that the death was not related to gene therapy.\n\nIn 1972 Friedmann and Roblin authored a paper in \"Science\" titled \"Gene therapy for human genetic disease?\" Rogers (1970) was cited for proposing that \"exogenous good DNA\" be used to replace the defective DNA in those who suffer from genetic defects.\n\nIn 1984 a retrovirus vector system was designed that could efficiently insert foreign genes into mammalian chromosomes.\n\nThe first approved gene therapy clinical research in the US took place on 14 September 1990, at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), under the direction of William French Anderson. Four-year-old Ashanti DeSilva received treatment for a genetic defect that left her with ADA-SCID, a severe immune system deficiency. The effects were temporary, but successful.\n\nCancer gene therapy was introduced in 1992/93 (Trojan et al. 1993). The treatment of glioblastoma multiforme, the malignant brain tumor whose outcome is always fatal, was done using a vector expressing antisense IGF-I RNA (clinical trial approved by NIH n˚ 1602, and FDA in 1994). This therapy also represents the beginning of cancer immunogene therapy, a treatment which proves to be effective due to the anti-tumor mechanism of IGF-I antisense, which is related to strong immune and apoptotic phenomena.\n\nIn 1992 Claudio Bordignon, working at the Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, performed the first gene therapy procedure using hematopoietic stem cells as vectors to deliver genes intended to correct hereditary diseases. In 2002 this work led to the publication of the first successful gene therapy treatment for adenosine deaminase-deficiency (SCID). The success of a multi-center trial for treating children with SCID (severe combined immune deficiency or \"bubble boy\" disease) from 2000 and 2002, was questioned when two of the ten children treated at the trial's Paris center developed a leukemia-like condition. Clinical trials were halted temporarily in 2002, but resumed after regulatory review of the protocol in the US, the United Kingdom, France, Italy and Germany.\n\nIn 1993 Andrew Gobea was born with SCID following prenatal genetic screening. Blood was removed from his mother's placenta and umbilical cord immediately after birth, to acquire stem cells. The allele that codes for adenosine deaminase (ADA) was obtained and inserted into a retrovirus. Retroviruses and stem cells were mixed, after which the viruses inserted the gene into the stem cell chromosomes. Stem cells containing the working ADA gene were injected into Andrew's blood. Injections of the ADA enzyme were also given weekly. For four years T cells (white blood cells), produced by stem cells, made ADA enzymes using the ADA gene. After four years more treatment was needed.\n\nJesse Gelsinger's death in 1999 impeded gene therapy research in the US. As a result, the FDA suspended several clinical trials pending the reevaluation of ethical and procedural practices.\n\nThe modified cancer gene therapy strategy of antisense IGF-I RNA (NIH n˚ 1602) using antisense / triple helix anti IGF-I approach was registered in 2002 by Wiley gene therapy clinical trial - n˚ 635 and 636. The approach has shown promising results in the treatment of six different malignant tumors: glioblastoma, cancers of liver, colon, prostate, uterus and ovary (Collaborative NATO Science Programme on Gene Therapy USA, France, Poland n˚ LST 980517 conducted by J. Trojan) (Trojan et al., 2012). This anti–gene antisense/triple helix therapy has proven to be efficient, due to the mechanism stopping simultaneously IGF-I expression on translation and transcription levels, strengthening anti-tumor immune and apoptotic phenomena.\n\nSickle-cell disease can be treated in mice. The mice – which have essentially the same defect that causes human cases – used a viral vector to induce production of fetal hemoglobin (HbF), which normally ceases to be produced shortly after birth. In humans, the use of hydroxyurea to stimulate the production of HbF temporarily alleviates sickle cell symptoms. The researchers demonstrated this treatment to be a more permanent means to increase therapeutic HbF production.\n\nA new gene therapy approach repaired errors in messenger RNA derived from defective genes. This technique has the potential to treat thalassaemia, cystic fibrosis and some cancers.\n\nResearchers created liposomes 25 nanometers across that can carry therapeutic DNA through pores in the nuclear membrane.\n\nIn 2003 a research team inserted genes into the brain for the first time. They used liposomes coated in a polymer called polyethylene glycol, which, unlike viral vectors, are small enough to cross the blood–brain barrier.\n\nShort pieces of double-stranded RNA (short, interfering RNAs or siRNAs) are used by cells to degrade RNA of a particular sequence. If a siRNA is designed to match the RNA copied from a faulty gene, then the abnormal protein product of that gene will not be produced.\n\nGendicine is a cancer gene therapy that delivers the tumor suppressor gene p53 using an engineered adenovirus. In 2003, it was approved in China for the treatment of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.\n\nIn March researchers announced the successful use of gene therapy to treat two adult patients for X-linked chronic granulomatous disease, a disease which affects myeloid cells and damages the immune system. The study is the first to show that gene therapy can treat the myeloid system.\n\nIn May a team reported a way to prevent the immune system from rejecting a newly delivered gene. Similar to organ transplantation, gene therapy has been plagued by this problem. The immune system normally recognizes the new gene as foreign and rejects the cells carrying it. The research utilized a newly uncovered network of genes regulated by molecules known as microRNAs. This natural function selectively obscured their therapeutic gene in immune system cells and protected it from discovery. Mice infected with the gene containing an immune-cell microRNA target sequence did not reject the gene.\n\nIn August scientists successfully treated metastatic melanoma in two patients using killer T cells genetically retargeted to attack the cancer cells.\n\nIn November researchers reported on the use of VRX496, a gene-based immunotherapy for the treatment of HIV that uses a lentiviral vector to deliver an antisense gene against the HIV envelope. In a phase I clinical trial, five subjects with chronic HIV infection who had failed to respond to at least two antiretroviral regimens were treated. A single intravenous infusion of autologous CD4 T cells genetically modified with VRX496 was well tolerated. All patients had stable or decreased viral load; four of the five patients had stable or increased CD4 T cell counts. All five patients had stable or increased immune response to HIV antigens and other pathogens. This was the first evaluation of a lentiviral vector administered in a US human clinical trial.\n\nIn May researchers announced the first gene therapy trial for inherited retinal disease. The first operation was carried out on a 23-year-old British male, Robert Johnson, in early 2007.\n\nLeber's congenital amaurosis is an inherited blinding disease caused by mutations in the RPE65 gene. The results of a small clinical trial in children were published in April. Delivery of recombinant adeno-associated virus (AAV) carrying RPE65 yielded positive results. In May two more groups reported positive results in independent clinical trials using gene therapy to treat the condition. In all three clinical trials, patients recovered functional vision without apparent side-effects.\n\nIn September researchers were able to give trichromatic vision to squirrel monkeys. In November 2009, researchers halted a fatal genetic disorder called adrenoleukodystrophy in two children using a lentivirus vector to deliver a functioning version of ABCD1, the gene that is mutated in the disorder.\n\nAn April paper reported that gene therapy addressed achromatopsia (color blindness) in dogs by targeting cone photoreceptors. Cone function and day vision were restored for at least 33 months in two young specimens. The therapy was less efficient for older dogs.\n\nIn September it was announced that an 18-year-old male patient in France with beta-thalassemia major had been successfully treated. Beta-thalassemia major is an inherited blood disease in which beta haemoglobin is missing and patients are dependent on regular lifelong blood transfusions. The technique used a lentiviral vector to transduce the human ß-globin gene into purified blood and marrow cells obtained from the patient in June 2007. The patient's haemoglobin levels were stable at 9 to 10 g/dL. About a third of the hemoglobin contained the form introduced by the viral vector and blood transfusions were not needed. Further clinical trials were planned. Bone marrow transplants are the only cure for thalassemia, but 75% of patients do not find a matching donor.\n\nCancer immunogene therapy using modified anti – gene, antisense / triple helix approach was introduced in South America in 2010/11 in La Sabana University, Bogota (Ethical Committee 14 December 2010, no P-004-10). Considering the ethical aspect of gene diagnostic and gene therapy targeting IGF-I, the IGF-I expressing tumors i.e. lung and epidermis cancers, were treated (Trojan et al. 2016).\n\nIn 2007 and 2008, a man was cured of HIV by repeated hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (see also Allogeneic stem cell transplantation, Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation, Allotransplantation) with double-delta-32 mutation which disables the CCR5 receptor. This cure was accepted by the medical community in 2011. It required complete ablation of existing bone marrow, which is very debilitating.\n\nIn August two of three subjects of a pilot study were confirmed to have been cured from chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). The therapy used genetically modified T cells to attack cells that expressed the CD19 protein to fight the disease. In 2013, the researchers announced that 26 of 59 patients had achieved complete remission and the original patient had remained tumor-free.\n\nHuman HGF plasmid DNA therapy of cardiomyocytes is being examined as a potential treatment for coronary artery disease as well as treatment for the damage that occurs to the heart after myocardial infarction.\n\nIn 2011 Neovasculgen was registered in Russia as the first-in-class gene-therapy drug for treatment of peripheral artery disease, including critical limb ischemia; it delivers the gene encoding for VEGF. Neovasculogen is a plasmid encoding the CMV promoter and the 165 amino acid form of VEGF.\n\nThe FDA approved Phase 1 clinical trials on thalassemia major patients in the US for 10 participants in July. The study was expected to continue until 2015.\n\nIn July 2012, the European Medicines Agency recommended approval of a gene therapy treatment for the first time in either Europe or the United States. The treatment used Alipogene tiparvovec (Glybera) to compensate for lipoprotein lipase deficiency, which can cause severe pancreatitis. The recommendation was endorsed by the European Commission in November 2012 and commercial rollout began in late 2014.\n\nIn December 2012, it was reported that 10 of 13 patients with multiple myeloma were in remission \"or very close to it\" three months after being injected with a treatment involving genetically engineered T cells to target proteins NY-ESO-1 and LAGE-1, which exist only on cancerous myeloma cells.\n\nIn March researchers reported that three of five subjects who had acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) had been in remission for five months to two years after being treated with genetically modified T cells which attacked cells with CD19 genes on their surface, i.e. all B-cells, cancerous or not. The researchers believed that the patients' immune systems would make normal T-cells and B-cells after a couple of months. They were also given bone marrow. One patient relapsed and died and one died of a blood clot unrelated to the disease.\n\nFollowing encouraging Phase 1 trials, in April, researchers announced they were starting Phase 2 clinical trials (called CUPID2 and SERCA-LVAD) on 250 patients at several hospitals to combat heart disease. The therapy was designed to increase the levels of SERCA2, a protein in heart muscles, improving muscle function. The FDA granted this a Breakthrough Therapy Designation to accelerate the trial and approval process. In 2016 it was reported that no improvement was found from the CUPID 2 trial.\n\nIn July researchers reported promising results for six children with two severe hereditary diseases had been treated with a partially deactivated lentivirus to replace a faulty gene and after 7–32 months. Three of the children had metachromatic leukodystrophy, which causes children to lose cognitive and motor skills. The other children had Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, which leaves them to open to infection, autoimmune diseases and cancer. Follow up trials with gene therapy on another six children with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome were also reported as promising.\n\nIn October researchers reported that two children born with adenosine deaminase severe combined immunodeficiency disease (ADA-SCID) had been treated with genetically engineered stem cells 18 months previously and that their immune systems were showing signs of full recovery. Another three children were making progress. In 2014 a further 18 children with ADA-SCID were cured by gene therapy. ADA-SCID children have no functioning immune system and are sometimes known as \"bubble children.\"\n\nAlso in October researchers reported that they had treated six haemophilia sufferers in early 2011 using an adeno-associated virus. Over two years later all six were producing clotting factor.\n\nData from three trials on Topical cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene therapy were reported to not support its clinical use as a mist inhaled into the lungs to treat cystic fibrosis patients with lung infections.\n\nIn January researchers reported that six choroideremia patients had been treated with adeno-associated virus with a copy of REP1. Over a six-month to two-year period all had improved their sight. By 2016, 32 patients had been treated with positive results and researchers were hopeful the treatment would be long-lasting. Choroideremia is an inherited genetic eye disease with no approved treatment, leading to loss of sight.\n\nIn March researchers reported that 12 HIV patients had been treated since 2009 in a trial with a genetically engineered virus with a rare mutation (CCR5 deficiency) known to protect against HIV with promising results.\n\nClinical trials of gene therapy for sickle cell disease were started in 2014 although one review failed to find any such trials.\n\nIn February LentiGlobin BB305, a gene therapy treatment undergoing clinical trials for treatment of beta thalassemia gained FDA \"breakthrough\" status after several patients were able to forgo the frequent blood transfusions usually required to treat the disease.\n\nIn March researchers delivered a recombinant gene encoding a broadly neutralizing antibody into monkeys infected with simian HIV; the monkeys' cells produced the antibody, which cleared them of HIV. The technique is named immunoprophylaxis by gene transfer (IGT). Animal tests for antibodies to ebola, malaria, influenza and hepatitis are underway.\n\nIn March scientists, including an inventor of CRISPR, urged a worldwide moratorium on germline gene therapy, writing “scientists should avoid even attempting, in lax jurisdictions, germline genome modification for clinical application in humans” until the full implications “are discussed among scientific and governmental organizations”.\n\nAlso in 2015 Glybera was approved for the German market.\n\nIn October, researchers announced that they had treated a baby girl, Layla Richards, with an experimental treatment using donor T-cells genetically engineered using TALEN to attack cancer cells. Two months after the treatment she was still free of her cancer (a highly aggressive form of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia [ALL]). Children with highly aggressive ALL normally have a very poor prognosis and Layla's disease had been regarded as terminal before the treatment.\n\nIn December, scientists of major world academies called for a moratorium on inheritable human genome edits, including those related to CRISPR-Cas9 technologies but that basic research including embryo gene editing should continue.\n\nIn April the Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use of the European Medicines Agency endorsed a gene therapy treatment called Strimvelis and recommended it be approved. This treats children born with ADA-SCID and who have no functioning immune system - sometimes called the \"bubble baby\" disease. This would be the second gene therapy treatment to be approved in Europe.\n\nIn October, Chinese scientists reported they had started a trial to genetically modify T-cells from 10 adult patients with lung cancer and reinject the modified T-cells back into their bodies to attack the cancer cells. The T-cells had the PD-1 protein (which stops or slows the immune response) removed using CRISPR-Cas9.\n\nSpeculated uses for gene therapy include:\n\nGene Therapy techniques have the potential to provide alternative treatments for those with infertility. Recently, successful experimentation on mice has proven that fertility can be restored by using the gene therapy method, CRISPR. Spermatogenical stem cells from another organism were transplanted into the testes of an infertile male mouse. The stem cells re-established spermatogenesis and fertility.\n\nAthletes might adopt gene therapy technologies to improve their performance. Gene doping is not known to occur, but multiple gene therapies may have such effects. Kayser et al. argue that gene doping could level the playing field if all athletes receive equal access. Critics claim that any therapeutic intervention for non-therapeutic/enhancement purposes compromises the ethical foundations of medicine and sports.\n\nGenetic engineering could be used to change physical appearance, metabolism, and even improve physical capabilities and mental faculties such as memory and intelligence. Ethical claims about germline engineering include beliefs that every fetus has a right to remain genetically unmodified, that parents hold the right to genetically modify their offspring, and that every child has the right to be born free of preventable diseases. For adults, genetic engineering could be seen as another enhancement technique to add to diet, exercise, education, cosmetics and plastic surgery. Another theorist claims that moral concerns limit but do not prohibit germline engineering.\n\nPossible regulatory schemes include a complete ban, provision to everyone, or professional self-regulation. The American Medical Association’s Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs stated that \"genetic interventions to enhance traits should be considered permissible only in severely restricted situations: (1) clear and meaningful benefits to the fetus or child; (2) no trade-off with other characteristics or traits; and (3) equal access to the genetic technology, irrespective of income or other socioeconomic characteristics.\"\n\nAs early in the history of biotechnology as 1990, there have been scientists opposed to attempts to modify the human germline using these new tools, and such concerns have continued as technology progressed. With the advent of new techniques like CRISPR, in March 2015 a group of scientists urged a worldwide moratorium on clinical use of gene editing technologies to edit the human genome in a way that can be inherited. In April 2015, researchers sparked controversy when they reported results of basic research to edit the DNA of non-viable human embryos using CRISPR.\n\nRegulations covering genetic modification are part of general guidelines about human-involved biomedical research.\n\nThe Helsinki Declaration (Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects) was amended by the World Medical Association's General Assembly in 2008. This document provides principles physicians and researchers must consider when involving humans as research subjects. The Statement on Gene Therapy Research initiated by the Human Genome Organization (HUGO) in 2001 provides a legal baseline for all countries. HUGO’s document emphasizes human freedom and adherence to human rights, and offers recommendations for somatic gene therapy, including the importance of recognizing public concerns about such research.\n\nNo federal legislation lays out protocols or restrictions about human genetic engineering. This subject is governed by overlapping regulations from local and federal agencies, including the Department of Health and Human Services, the FDA and NIH's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee. Researchers seeking federal funds for an investigational new drug application, (commonly the case for somatic human genetic engineering), must obey international and federal guidelines for the protection of human subjects.\n\nNIH serves as the main gene therapy regulator for federally funded research. Privately funded research is advised to follow these regulations. NIH provides funding for research that develops or enhances genetic engineering techniques and to evaluate the ethics and quality in current research. The NIH maintains a mandatory registry of human genetic engineering research protocols that includes all federally funded projects.\n\nAn NIH advisory committee published a set of guidelines on gene manipulation. The guidelines discuss lab safety as well as human test subjects and various experimental types that involve genetic changes. Several sections specifically pertain to human genetic engineering, including Section III-C-1. This section describes required review processes and other aspects when seeking approval to begin clinical research involving genetic transfer into a human patient. The protocol for a gene therapy clinical trial must be approved by the NIH's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee prior to any clinical trial beginning; this is different from any other kind of clinical trial.\nAs with other kinds of drugs, the FDA regulates the quality and safety of gene therapy products and supervises how these products are used clinically. Therapeutic alteration of the human genome falls under the same regulatory requirements as any other medical treatment. Research involving human subjects, such as clinical trials, must be reviewed and approved by the FDA and an Institutional Review Board.\n\nGene therapy is the basis for the plotline of the film \"I Am Legend\" and the TV show \"Will Gene Therapy Change the Human Race?\". It is also used in Stargate as a means of allowing humans to use Ancient technology.\n\n\n\n", "id": "12891", "title": "Gene therapy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12893", "text": "Galatea\n\nGalatea is an ancient Greek name meaning \"she who is milk-white\".\n\nGalatea, Galathea or Gallathea may refer to:\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "12893", "title": "Galatea"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12896", "text": "Gulf of Oman\n\nThe Gulf of Oman or Sea of Makran or Sea of Oman (—\"Ḫalīdj ʾUmān\"; in Balochi: تیابءِ مکران in \"Khaleej Oman\") is a strait (and not an actual gulf) that connects the Arabian Sea with the Strait of Hormuz, which then runs to the Persian Gulf. It is generally included as a branch of the Persian Gulf, not only as an arm of the Arabian Sea. It borders Pakistan and Iran on the north, Oman on the south, and the United Arab Emirates on the west.\n\nThe International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Gulf of Oman as follows:\n\n\n\n", "id": "12896", "title": "Gulf of Oman"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12898", "text": "Grammatical case\n\nCase is a special grammatical category whose value reflects the grammatical function performed by a noun, pronoun, adjective, participle or numeral in a phrase, clause, or sentence. In some languages, nouns, pronouns, adjectives, determiners, participles, prepositions, numerals, articles and their modifiers take different inflected forms depending on what case they are in. English has largely lost its case system, although it still has 3 cases that are simplified forms of nominative case, accusative case and genitive case: subjective case (I, you, he, she, it, we, they, who, whoever), objective case (me, you, him, her, it, us, them, whom, whomever) and possessive case (your, yours, my, mine, his, hers, its, their, theirs, our, ours, whose, whose ever). Distinctions can be seen with the personal pronouns: forms such as \"I\", \"he\" and \"we\" are used in the role of subject (\"I kicked the ball\"), whereas forms such as \"me\", \"him\" and \"us\" are used in the role of object (\"John kicked me\").\n\nLanguages such as Sanskrit, Ancient Greek, Latin, Armenian, Hungarian, Tibetan, Turkish, Tamil, Russian, Polish, Serbo-Croatian, Estonian, Finnish, Icelandic, Ukrainian, Lithuanian, Basque, and the majority of Caucasian languages have extensive case systems, with nouns, pronouns, adjectives, and determiners all inflecting (usually by means of different suffixes) to indicate their case. A language may have a number of different cases (German and Icelandic have four; Turkish, Latin and Russian each have at least six; Armenian, Polish, Serbian, Croatian, Ukrainian, and Lithuanian have seven; Sanskrit has eight; Estonian and Finnish have fifteen, Hungarian has eighteen and Tsez has sixty-four). Commonly encountered cases include nominative, accusative, dative, and genitive. A role that one of these languages marks by case will often be marked in English using a preposition. For example, the English prepositional phrase \"with (his) foot\" (as in \"John kicked the ball with his foot\") might be rendered in Russian using a single noun in the instrumental case, or in Ancient Greek as (, meaning \"the foot\" with both words (the definite article, and the noun () \"foot\") changing to dative form.\n\nAs a language evolves, cases can merge (for instance, in Ancient Greek the locative case has merged with the dative), a phenomenon formally called syncretism.\n\nMore formally, case has been defined as \"a system of marking dependent nouns for the type of relationship they bear to their heads\". Cases should be distinguished from thematic roles such as \"agent\" and \"patient\". They are often closely related, and in languages such as Latin several thematic roles have an associated case, but cases are a morphological notion, whereas thematic roles are a semantic one. Languages having cases often exhibit free word order, because thematic roles are not required to be marked by position in the sentence.\n\nThe English word \"case\" used in this sense comes from the Latin \"\", which is derived from the verb , \"to fall\", from the Proto-Indo-European root \"\". The Latin word is a calque of the Greek , , lit. \"falling, fall\". The sense is that all other cases are considered to have \"fallen\" away from the nominative. This picture is also reflected in the word \"declension\", from Latin , \"to lean\", from the PIE root \"\".\n\nThe equivalent to \"case\" in several other European languages also derives from \"casus\", including in French, in Spanish and in German. The Russian word (\"padyézh\") similarly contains a root meaning \"fall\", and the German and Czech simply mean \"fall\", and are used for both the concept of grammatical case and to refer to physical falls. The Finnish equivalent is , which can also mean \"position\" or \"support\".\n\nAlthough not very prominent in modern English, cases featured much more saliently in Old English and other ancient Indo-European languages, such as Latin, Ancient Greek, and Sanskrit. Historically, the Indo-European languages had eight morphological cases, though modern languages typically have fewer, using prepositions and word order to convey information that had previously been conveyed using distinct noun forms. Among modern languages, cases still feature prominently in most of the Balto-Slavic languages (except Macedonian and Bulgarian), with most having six to eight cases, as well as Icelandic, German and Modern Greek, which have four. In German, cases are mostly marked on articles and adjectives, and less so on nouns. In Icelandic, articles, adjectives, personal names and nouns are all marked for case, making it, among other things, the living Germanic language that could be said to most closely resemble Proto-Germanic.\n\nThe eight historical Indo-European cases are as follows, with examples either of the English case or of the English syntactic alternative to case:\n\nAll of the above are just rough descriptions; the precise distinctions vary from language to language, and are often quite complex. Case is based fundamentally on changes to the noun to indicate the noun's role in the sentence. This is not how English works, where word order and prepositions are used to achieve this.\n\nModern English has largely abandoned the inflectional case system of Indo-European in favor of analytic constructions. The personal pronouns of Modern English retain morphological case more strongly than any other word class (a remnant of the more extensive case system of Old English). For other pronouns, and all nouns, adjectives, and articles, grammatical function is indicated only by word order, by prepositions, and by the genitive clitic \"-'s\".\n\nTaken as a whole, English personal pronouns are typically said to have three morphological cases:\n\n\nMost English personal pronouns have five forms: the nominative and oblique case forms, the possessive case, which has both a \"determiner\" form (such as \"my\", \"our\") and a distinct \"independent\" form (such as \"mine\", \"ours\") (with two exceptions: the third person singular masculine and the third person singular neuter \"it\", which use the same form for both determiner and independent [\"his car\", \"it is his\"]), and a distinct \"reflexive\" or \"intensive\" form (such as \"myself\", \"ourselves\"). The interrogative personal pronoun \"who\" exhibits the greatest diversity of forms within the modern English pronoun system, having definite nominative, oblique, and genitive forms (\"who\", \"whom\", \"whose\") and equivalently coordinating indefinite forms (\"whoever\", \"whomever\", and \"whosever\").\n\nThough English \"pronouns\" can have subject and object forms (he/him, she/her), \"nouns\" show only a singular/plural and a possessive/non-possessive distinction (e.g. \"chair\", \"chairs\", \"chair's\", \"chairs\"'). Note that \"chair\" does not change form between \"the chair is here\" (subject) and \"I saw the chair\" (direct object), a distinction made by word order and context.\n\nCases can be ranked in the following hierarchy, where a language that does not have a given case will tend to not have any cases to the right of the missing case:\n\nThis is only a general tendency, however. Many forms of Central German such as Colognian or Luxembourgish have a dative case but lack a genitive. In Irish nouns, the nominative and accusative have fallen together, whereas the dative–locative has remained separate in some paradigms; Irish also has a genitive and vocative case. In Punjabi, the accusative, genitive, and dative have merged to an oblique case, but the language still retains vocative, locative, and ablative cases. Old English had an instrumental case, but not a locative or prepositional.\n\nIn the most common case concord system, only the head-word (the noun) in a phrase is marked for case. This system appears in Turkic languages, Mongolian, Quechua, Dravidian languages, many Papuan languages, Indo-Aryan languages, and others. In Basque and various Amazonian and Australian languages, only the phrase-final word (not necessarily the noun) is marked for case. In many Indo-European, Balto-Finnic, and Semitic languages, case is marked on the noun, the determiner, and usually the adjective. Other systems are less common. In some languages, there is double-marking of a word as both genitive (to indicate semantic role) and another case such as accusative (to establish concord with the head noun).\n\nDeclension is the process or result of altering nouns to the correct grammatical cases. Languages with rich nominal inflection (use grammatical cases for many purposes) typically have a number of identifiable declension classes, or groups of nouns with a similar pattern of case inflection or declension. Sanskrit has six declension classes, whereas Latin is traditionally considered to have five, and Ancient Greek three declension classes.\n\nIn Indo-European languages, declension patterns may depend on a variety of factors, such as gender, number, phonological environment, and irregular historical factors. Pronouns sometimes have separate paradigms. In some languages, particularly Slavic languages, a case may contain different groups of endings depending on whether the word is a noun or an adjective. A single case may contain many different endings, some of which may even be derived from different roots. For example, in Polish, the genitive case has \"-a, -u, -ów, -i/-y, -e-\" for nouns, and \"-ego, -ej, -ich/-ych\" for adjectives. To a lesser extent, a noun's animacy or humanness may add another layer of complexity. For example, in Russian:\n\nvs.\nand\n\nIn German, grammatical case is largely preserved in the articles and adjectives, but nouns have lost many of their original endings. Below is an example of case inflection in German using the masculine definite article and one of the German words for \"sailor\".\n\n\nModern Greek has four cases: nominative, genitive, accusative, and vocative. For neuters and most groups of feminines and plural masculines, only the genitive case differs from the other three. Below is an example of the declension of (sky), which has a different form in the singular of all four cases, together with the appropriate article in both the singular and the plural:\n\n\nAncient Greek had one additional case, the dative. At some point, it was replaced with the preposition , followed by the accusative. This became necessary when pronunciation simplified, merging the two long vowels eta and omega to short. The result was that dative did not sound much different from the accusative in the singular of the first two groups.\n\nWith time, only the sigma of was left and got attached to the article, except when an article is not used and it becomes instead. Below is an example with a modern dative is presented of the word (city):\n\n\nCases in Japanese are marked by particles placed after the nouns. A distinctive feature of Japanese is the presence of two cases which are roughly equivalent to the nominative case in other languages: one representing the sentence topic, other representing the subject. The most important case markers are the following:\n\n\nCases in Korean are marked by particles placed after the nouns, similar to Japanese. Like Japanese, the nominative case has two distinctions, one representing the topic of a sentence and the other the subject. The most important case markers are the following:\n\n\nAn example of a Latin case inflection is given below, using the singular forms of the Latin term for \"cook,\" which belongs to Latin's second declension class.\n\n\nLatvian nouns have seven grammatical cases: nominative, genitive, dative, accusative, instrumental, locative and vocative. The instrumental case is always identical to the accusative in the singular and to the dative in the plural. It is used as a free-standing case (without a preposition) only in highly restricted contexts in modern Latvian.\n\nAn example of a Latvian case inflection is given below, using the singular forms of the Latvian term for \"man,\" which belongs to the first declension class.\n\n\nIn Lithuanian, only the inflection usually changes in the seven different grammatical cases:\n\n\nAn example of a Polish case inflection is given below, using the singular forms of the Polish terms for \"human\" (') and \"monkey\" (')\n\n\nHungarian declension is relatively simple with regular suffixes attached to the vast majority of nouns. The following table lists a few of the many cases used in Hungarian.\n\nRomanian is the only major Romance language with a case system for all nouns, whereas all other languages dropped the cases replacing them by prepositions. An example of Romanian case inflection is given below, using the singular form of the Romanian word for \"boy\":\n\n\nAn example of a Russian case inflection is given below, using the singular forms of the Russian term for \"sailor,\" which belongs to Russian's first declension class.\n\nGrammatical case was analyzed extensively in Sanskrit. The grammarian Pāṇini identified six semantic roles or \"kāraka\", which by default are related to the following eight Sanskrit cases in order:\n\nFor example, in the following sentence \"leaf\" is the agent (\"kartā\", nominative case), \"tree\" is the source (\"apādāna\", ablative case), and \"ground\" is the locus (\"adhikaraṇa\", locative case). The declensions are reflected in the morphemes \"-āt\", \"-am\", and \"-au\" respectively.\nHowever, the cases may be deployed for other than the default thematic roles. A notable example is the passive construction. In the following sentence, \"Devadatta\" is the \"kartā\", but appears in the instrumental case, and \"rice\", the \"karman\", object, is in the nominative case (as subject of the verb). The declensions are reflected in the morphemes \"-ena\" and \"-am\".\nThe Tamil case system is analyzed in native and missionary grammars as consisting of a finite number of cases. The usual treatment of Tamil case (Arden 1942) is one in which there are seven cases: nominative (first case), accusative (second case), instrumental (third), dative (fourth), ablative (fifth), genitive (sixth), and locative (seventh). In traditional analyses, there is always a clear distinction made between postpositional morphemes and case endings. The vocative is sometimes given a place in the case system as an eighth case, but vocative forms do not participate in usual morphophonemic alternations and do not govern the use of any postpositions. Modern grammarians, however, argue that this eight-case classification is coarse and artificial and that Tamil usage is best understood if each suffix or combination of suffixes is seen as marking a separate case.\n\nAs languages evolve, case systems change. In early Ancient Greek, for example, the genitive and ablative cases became combined, giving five cases, rather than the six retained in Latin. In modern Hindi, the Sanskrit cases have been reduced to two: a direct case (for subjects and direct objects) and an oblique case. In English, apart from the pronouns discussed above, case has vanished altogether except for the possessive/non-possessive dichotomy in nouns.\n\nThe evolution of the treatment of case relationships can be circular. Adpositions can become unstressed and sound like they are an unstressed syllable of a neighboring word. A postposition can thus merge into the stem of a head noun, developing various forms depending on the phonological shape of the stem. Affixes can then be subject to various phonological processes such as assimilation, vowel centering to the schwa, phoneme loss, and fusion, and these processes can reduce or even eliminate the distinctions between cases. Languages can then compensate for the resulting loss of function by creating adpositions, thus coming full circle.\n\nRecent experiments in agent-based modeling have shown how case systems can emerge and evolve in a population of language users. The experiments demonstrate that language users may introduce new case markers to reduce the cognitive effort required for semantic interpretation, hence facilitating communication through language. Case markers then become generalized through analogical reasoning and reuse.\n\nLanguages are categorized into several case systems, based on their \"morphosyntactic alignment\"—how they group verb agents and patients into cases:\n\n\nThe following are systems that some languages use to mark case instead of, or in addition to, declension:\n\n\nWith a few exceptions, most languages in the Uralic family make extensive use of cases. Finnish has 15 cases according to the traditional understanding (or up to 30 depending on the interpretation). However, only 12 are commonly used in speech (see Finnish noun cases). Estonian has 14 and Hungarian has 18.\n\nSome languages have very many cases. For example, Tsez, a Northeast Caucasian language has 64 cases.\n\nThe original version of John Quijada's constructed language Ithkuil has 81 noun cases, and its descendent Ilaksh and Ithkuil after the 2011 revision both have 96 noun cases.\n\nThe lemma form of words, which is the form chosen by convention as the canonical form of a word, is usually the most unmarked or basic case, which is typically the nominative, trigger, or absolutive case, whichever a language may have.\n\n\n", "id": "12898", "title": "Grammatical case"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12899", "text": "Gestapo\n\nThe Gestapo (), abbreviation of Geheime Staatspolizei, or the Secret State Police, was the official secret police of Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe.\n\nThe force was created by Hermann Göring in 1933 by combining the executive and the judicial branches into one power. Beginning on 20 April 1934, it was under the administration of SS national leader Heinrich Himmler, who in 1936 was appointed Chief of German Police (\"Chef der Deutschen Polizei\") by Hitler. In 1936, Himmler made it a suboffice of the \"Sicherheitspolizei\" (SiPo) (\"Security Police\"). Then from 27 September 1939 forward, it was administered by the \"Reichssicherheitshauptamt\" (RSHA) (\"Reich Main Security Office\") and was considered a sister organization of the \"Sicherheitsdienst\" (SD) (\"Security Service\").\n\nAs part of the agreement in which Adolf Hitler became Chancellor of Germany, Hermann Göring—future commander of the Luftwaffe and the number two man in the Nazi Party—was named Interior Minister of Prussia. This gave Göring command of the largest police force in Germany. Soon afterward, Göring detached the political and intelligence sections from the police and filled their ranks with Nazis. On 26 April 1933, Göring merged the two units as the \"Geheime Staatspolizei\", which was abbreviated for a franking stamp and became known as the Gestapo. He originally wanted to name it the Secret Police Office (), but discovered the German initials \"GPA\" looked and sounded too much like those of the Russian GPU.\n\nIts first commander was Rudolf Diels, a protégé of Göring. Diels was appointed with the title of chief of \"Abteilung Ia\" (Department 1a) of the Political Police of the Prussian Interior Ministry. Diels was best known as the primary interrogator of Marinus van der Lubbe after the \"Reichstag\" fire. In late 1933, the \"Reich\" Interior Minister Wilhelm Frick wanted to integrate all the police forces of the German states under his control. Göring outflanked him by removing the Prussian political and intelligence departments from the state interior ministry. Göring himself took over the Gestapo in 1934 and urged Hitler to extend the agency's authority throughout Germany. This represented a radical departure from German tradition, which held that law enforcement was (mostly) a \"Land\" (state) and local matter. In this, he ran into conflict with Heinrich Himmler, who was police chief of the second most powerful German state, Bavaria. Frick did not have the muscle to take on Göring by himself so he allied with Himmler. With Frick's support, Himmler (pushed on by his right-hand man, Reinhard Heydrich) took over the political police of state after state. Soon only Prussia was left.\nConcerned that Diels was not ruthless enough to effectively counteract the power of the \"Sturmabteilung\" (SA), Göring handed over control of the Gestapo to Himmler on 20 April 1934. Also on that date, Hitler appointed Himmler chief of all German police outside Prussia. Heydrich, named chief of the Gestapo by Himmler on 22 April 1934, also continued as head of the SS Security Service (\"Sicherheitsdienst,\" SD). Himmler and Heydrich both immediately began installing their own personnel in select positions, several of whom were directly from the Bavarian Political Police like Heinrich Müller, Franz Josef Huber, and Josef Meisinger. Many of the Gestapo employees in the newly established offices were young and highly educated in a wide-variety of academic fields and moreover, represented a new generation of National Socialist adherents, who were hard-working, efficient, and prepared to carry the Nazi state forward through the persecution of their political opponents.\n\nBy the spring of 1934 Himmler's SS controlled the SD and the Gestapo, but for him, there was still a problem, as technically the SS (and the Gestapo by proxy) was subordinated to the SA which was under the command of Ernst Roehm. Himmler wanted to free himself entirely from Roehm, who he viewed as an obstacle. Roehm's position was menacing as upwards of over 4.5 million men fell under his command once the militias and veterans organizations were absorbed by the SA, a fact which fueled Roehm's aspirations; his dream of fusing the SA and \"Reichswehr\" together was undermining Hitler's relationships with the leadership of Germany's armed forces. Several Nazi chieftains, among them Goering, Joseph Goebbels, Rudolf Hess, and Himmler, began a concerted campaign to convince Hitler to take action against Roehm. Both the SD and Gestapo released information concerning an imminent putsch by the SA. Once persuaded, Hitler acted by setting Himmler's SS into action, who then proceeded to murder over 100 of Hitler's identified antagonists. While members of the Gestapo did not participate in the killing, they supplied the information which implicated the SA and ultimately enabled Himmler and Heydrich to emancipate themselves entirely from the organization. For the Gestapo, the next two years following the Night of the Long Knives, a term describing the putsch against Roehm and the SA, were characterized by \"behind-the-scenes political wrangling over policing.\"\n\nOn 17 June 1936, Hitler decreed the unification of all police forces in the Reich and named Himmler as Chief of German Police. This action effectively merged the police into the SS and removed it from Frick's control. Himmler was nominally subordinate to Frick as police chief, but as \"Reichsführer-SS\", he answered only to Hitler. This move also gave Himmler operational control over Germany's entire detective force. The Gestapo became a national state agency. Himmler also gained authority over all of Germany's uniformed law enforcement agencies, which were amalgamated into the new \"Ordnungspolizei\" (Orpo: Order Police), which became a national agency under SS general Kurt Daluege. Shortly thereafter, Himmler created the \"Kriminalpolizei\" (Kripo: Criminal Police), merging it with the Gestapo into the \"Sicherheitspolizei\" (SiPo: Security Police), under Heydrich's command. Heinrich Müller was at that time the Gestapo operations chief. He answered to Heydrich; Heydrich answered only to Himmler and Himmler answered only to Hitler.\n\nThe Gestapo had the authority to investigate cases of treason, espionage, sabotage and criminal attacks on the Nazi Party and Germany. The basic Gestapo law passed by the government in 1936 gave the Gestapo \"carte blanche\" to operate without judicial review—in effect, putting it above the law. The Gestapo was specifically exempted from responsibility to administrative courts, where citizens normally could sue the state to conform to laws. As early as 1935, a Prussian administrative court had ruled that the Gestapo's actions were not subject to judicial review. The SS officer Werner Best, onetime head of legal affairs in the Gestapo, summed up this policy by saying, \"As long as the police carries out the will of the leadership, it is acting legally.\"\n\nOn 27 September 1939, the security and police agencies of Nazi Germany—with the exception of the Orpo—were consolidated into the Reich Main Security Office (RSHA), headed by Heydrich. The Gestapo became \"Amt IV\" (Department IV) of RSHA and Müller became the Gestapo Chief, with Heydrich as his immediate superior. After Heydrich's 1942 assassination, Himmler assumed the leadership of the RSHA until January 1943, when Ernst Kaltenbrunner was appointed chief. Müller remained the Gestapo Chief. Adolf Eichmann headed the Gestapo's Office of Resettlement and then its Office of Jewish Affairs (\"Referat IV B4\" or Sub-Department IV, Section B4). He was Müller's direct subordinate.\n\nThe power of the Gestapo included the use of what was called, \"Schutzhaft\"—\"protective custody\", a euphemism for the power to imprison people without judicial proceedings. An oddity of the system was that the prisoner had to sign his own \"Schutzhaftbefehl\", an order declaring that the person had requested imprisonment—presumably out of fear of personal harm. In addition, thousands of political prisoners throughout Germany—and from 1941, throughout the occupied territories under the Night and Fog Decree—simply disappeared while in Gestapo custody. During World War II, the Gestapo was expanded to around 46,000 members. After Heydrich's death in June 1942, and as the war progressed, Müller's power and the independence grew substantially. This trickled down the chain of his subordinates. It led to much more independence of action.\n\nThe Polish government in exile in London during World War II received sensitive military information about Nazi Germany from agents and informants throughout Europe. After Germany conquered Poland in the autumn of 1939, Gestapo officials believed that they had neutralized Polish intelligence activities. However, certain Polish information about the movement of German police and SS units to the East during the German invasion of the Soviet Union in the autumn of 1941 was similar to information British intelligence secretly got through intercepting and decoding German police and SS messages sent by radio telegraphy.\n\nIn 1942, the Gestapo discovered a cache of Polish intelligence documents in Prague and were surprised to see that Polish agents and informants had been gathering detailed military information and smuggling it out to London, via Budapest and Istanbul. The Poles identified and tracked German military trains to the Eastern front and identified four \"Ordnungspolizei\" (\"Order Police\") battalions sent to conquered areas of the Soviet Union in October 1941 that engaged in war crimes and mass murder.\n\nPolish agents also gathered detailed information about the morale of German soldiers in the East. After uncovering a sample of the information the Poles had reported, Gestapo officials concluded that Polish intelligence activity represented a very serious danger to Germany. As late as 6 June 1944, Heinrich Müller—concerned about the leakage of information to the Allies—set up a special unit called \"Sonderkommando Jerzy\" that was meant to root out the Polish intelligence network in western and southwestern Europe.\n\nEarly in the regime's existence, harsh measures were meted out to political opponents and those who resisted Nazi doctrine (e.g., the Communists), a role the SA performed until the SD and Gestapo undermined their influence and took control of security in the Reich. Because the Gestapo seemed omniscient and omnipotent, the atmosphere of fear they created led to an overestimation of their reach and strength; a faulty assessment which hampered the operational effectiveness of underground resistance organizations. Antipathy to Hitler and his regime was not tolerated, so the Gestapo had an important role to play in monitoring and prosecuting all who opposed Nazi rule, whether openly or covertly.\n\nMany parts of Germany (where religious dissent existed upon the Nazi seizure of power) saw a rapid transformation; a change as noted by the Gestapo in conservative towns such as Würzburg, where people acquiesced to the regime either through accommodation, collaboration, or simple compliance. Increasing religious objections to Nazi policies led the Gestapo to carefully monitor church organizations. For the most part, members of the church did not offer political resistance but simply wanted to ensure that organizational doctrine remained intact.\n\nHowever, the Nazi regime sought to suppress any source of ideology other than its own, and set out to muzzle or crush the churches in the so-called Kirchenkampf. When Church leaders (clergy) voiced their misgiving about the euthanasia program and Nazi racial policies, Hitler intimated that he considered them \"traitors to the people\" and went so far as to call them \"the destroyers of Germany.\" The extreme anti-Semitism and neo-Pagan heresies of the Nazis caused some Christians to outright resist, and Pope Pius XI to issue the encyclical Mit Brennender Sorge denouncing Nazism and warning Catholics against joining or supporting the Party. Some pastors, like the Protestant clergyman Dietrich Bonhoeffer, paid for their opposition with their lives.\n\nIn an effort to counter the strength and influence of spiritual resistance, Nazi records reveal that the Gestapo's Referat B1 monitored the activities of bishops very closely – instructing that agents be set up in every diocese, that the bishops' reports to the Vatican should be obtained and that the bishops' areas of activity must be found out. Deans were to be targeted as the \"eyes and ears of the bishops\" and a \"vast network\" established to monitor the activities of ordinary clergy: \"The importance of this enemy is such that inspectors of security police and of the security service will make this group of people and the questions discussed by them their special concern\".\n\nIn \"Dachau: The Official History 1933–1945\", Paul Berben wrote that clergy were watched closely, and frequently denounced, arrested and sent to concentration camps: \"One priest was imprisoned in Dachau for having stated that there were good folk in England too; another suffered the same fate for warning a girl who wanted to marry an S.S. man after abjuring the Catholic faith; yet another because he conducted a service for a deceased communist\". Others were arrested simply on the basis of being \"suspected of activities hostile to the State\" or that there was reason to \"suppose that his dealings might harm society\". Over 2700 Catholic, Protestant and Orthodox clergy were imprisoned at Dachau alone.\n\nAfter Heydrich (who was staunchly anti-Catholic and anti-Christian) was assassinated in Prague, his successor, Ernst Kaltenbrunner, relaxed some of the policies and then disbanded Department IVB (religious opponents) of the Gestapo.\n\nBetween June 1942 and March 1943, student protests were calling for an end to the Nazi regime. These included the non-violent resistance of Hans and Sophie Scholl, two leaders of the White Rose student group. However, resistance groups and those who were in moral or political opposition to the Nazis were stalled by the fear of reprisals from the Gestapo. Fearful of an internal overthrow, the forces of the Gestapo were unleashed on the opposition. The first five months of 1943 witnessed thousands of arrests and executions as the Gestapo exercised their powers over the German public. Student opposition leaders were executed in late February, and a major opposition organization, the Oster Circle, was destroyed in April 1943. Efforts to resist the Nazi regime amounted to very little and had only minor chances of success, particularly since the broad percentage of the German people did not support oppositional movements.\n\nBetween 1934 and 1938, opponents of the Nazi regime and their fellow travelers began to emerge. Among the first to speak out were religious dissenters but following in their wake were educators, aristocratic businessmen, office workers, teachers, and others from nearly every walk of life. Most people quickly learned that open opposition was dangerous since Gestapo informants and agents were widespread. Yet a significant number of them still worked against the National Socialist government.\n\nDuring May 1935, the Gestapo broke up and arrested members of the \"Markwitz Circle,\" a group of former socialists in contact with Otto Strasser, who sought Hitler's downfall. From the mid-1930s into the early 1940s – various groups made up of communists, idealists, working-class people, and even far-right conservative opposition organizations covertly fought against Hitler's government, and several of them fomented plots that included Hitler's assassination. Nearly all of them, including: the Römer Group, Robby Group, Solf Circle, \"Schwarze Reichswehr\", the Party of the Radical Middle Class, \"Jungdeutscher Orden\", \"Schwarze Front\" and \"Stahlhelm\" were either discovered or infiltrated by the Gestapo. This led to corresponding arrests, being sent to concentration camps and execution. One of the methods employed by the Gestapo to contend with these resistance factions was 'protective detention' which facilitated the process in expediting dissenters to concentration camps and against which there was no legal defense.\n\nEarly efforts to resist the Nazis with aid from abroad were hindered when the opposition's peace feelers to the Western Allies did not meet with success. This was partly because of the Venlo incident of 1939. There SD and Gestapo agents, posing as anti-Nazis in the Netherlands, kidnapped two British Secret Intelligence Service (SIS) officers after having lured them to a meeting to discuss peace terms. This prompted Winston Churchill to ban any further contact with the German opposition. Later, the British and Americans did not want to deal with anti-Nazis because they were fearful that the Soviet Union would believe they were attempting to make deals behind their back.\n\nThe German opposition was in an unenviable position by the late spring and early summer of 1943. On one hand, it was next to impossible for them to overthrow Hitler and the party; on the other, the Allied demand for an unconditional surrender meant no opportunity for a compromise peace, which left the military and conservative aristocrats who opposed the regime no option (in their eyes) other than continuing the military struggle. Despite fear of the Gestapo after mass arrests and executions in the spring, the opposition still plotted and planned. One of the more famous schemes, Operation Valkyrie, involved a number of senior German officers and was carried out by Colonel Claus Schenk Graf von Stauffenberg. In an attempt to assassinate Hitler, Stauffenberg planted a bomb underneath a conference table inside the Wolf's Lair field headquarters. Known as the 20 July plot, this assassination attempt failed and Hitler was only slightly injured. Reports indicate that the Gestapo was caught unaware of this plot as they did not have sufficient protections in place at the appropriate locations nor did they take any preventative steps. Stauffenberg and his group were shot on 21 July 1944; meanwhile, his fellow conspirators were rounded up by the Gestapo and sent to a concentration camp. Thereafter, there was a show trial overseen by Roland Freisler, followed by their execution.\n\nSome Germans were convinced that it was their duty to apply all possible expedients to end the war as quickly as possible. Sabotage efforts were undertaken by members of the \"Abwehr\" (military intelligence) leadership, as they recruited people known to oppose the Nazi regime. The Gestapo cracked down ruthlessly on dissidents in Germany, just as they did everywhere else. Opposition became more difficult. Arrests, torture, and executions were common. Terror against \"state enemies\" had become a way of life to such a degree that the Gestapo's presence and methods were eventually normalized in the minds of people living in Nazi Germany.\n\nIn January 1933, Hermann Göring, Hitler's minister without portfolio, was appointed the head of the Prussian Police and began filling the political and intelligence units of the Prussian Secret Police with Nazi Party members. A year after the organizations inception, Göring wrote in a British publication about having created the organization on his own initiative and how he was \"chiefly responsible\" for the elimination of the Marxist and Communist threat to Germany and Prussia. Describing the activities of the organization, Göring boasted about the utter ruthlessness required for Germany's recovery, the establishment of concentration camps for that purpose, and even went on to claim that excesses were committed in the beginning, recounting how beatings took place here and there. On 26 April 1933, he reorganized the force's \"Amt III\" as the \"Gestapa\" (better-known by the \"sobriquet\" Gestapo), a secret state police intended to serve the Nazi cause. Less than two weeks later in early May 1933, the Gestapo moved into their Berlin headquarters at Prinz-Albrecht-Straße 8.\n\nWith its 1936 merging with the Kripo (National criminal police) to form sub-units of the \"Sicherheitspolizei\" (SiPo; Security Police), the Gestapo was classified as a government agency. Himmler by his appointment to \"Chef der Deutschen Polizei\" (Chief of German Police), along with serving as \"Reichsführer-SS\" made him independent of Interior Minister Wilhelm Frick's nominal control.\n\nThe SiPo was placed under the direct command of Reinhard Heydrich who was already chief of the Nazi Party's intelligence service, the \"Sicherheitsdienst\" (SD). The idea was to fully combine the party agency, the SD, with the SiPo, the state agency. SiPo members were encouraged to become members of the SS. However, in practise, the SiPo and the SD came into jurisdictional and operational conflict. Gestapo and Kripo had many experienced, professional policemen and investigators, who considered the SD to be a less competent agency.\n\nIn September 1939, the SiPo together with the SD were merged into the newly created \"Reichssicherheitshauptamt\" (RSHA: Reich Main Security Office). Both the Gestapo and Kripo became distinct departments within the RSHA. Although the \"Sicherheitspolizei\" was officially disbanded, the term SiPo was figuratively used to describe any RSHA personnel throughout the remainder of the war. In lieu of naming convention changes, the original construct of the SiPo, Gestapo, and Kripo cannot be fully comprehended as \"discrete entities\", since they ultimately formed \"a conglomerate in which each was wedded to each other and the SS through its Security Service, the SD.\"\n\nThe creation of the RSHA represented the formalization, at the top level, of the relationship under which the SD served as the intelligence agency for the security police. A similar coordination existed in the local offices. Within Germany and areas which were incorporated within the Reich for the purpose of civil administration, local offices of the Gestapo, criminal police, and SD were formally separate. They were subject to coordination by inspectors of the security police and SD on the staffs of the local higher SS and police leaders, however, and one of the principal functions of the local SD units was to serve as the intelligence agency for the local Gestapo units. In the occupied territories, the formal relationship between local units of the Gestapo, criminal police, and SD was slightly closer.\n\nThe Gestapo became known as RSHA \"Amt IV\" (\"Department or Office IV\") with Heinrich Müller as its chief. In January 1943, Himmler appointed Ernst Kaltenbrunner RSHA chief; almost seven months after Heydrich had been assassinated. The specific internal departments of \"Amt IV\" were as follows:\n\n\n\nCentral administrative office of the Gestapo, responsible for card files of all personnel including all officials.\n\nAdministration for regions outside the \"Reich\".\n\n\nIn 1941 \"Referat N\", the central command office of the Gestapo was formed. However, these internal departments remained and the Gestapo continued to be a department under the RSHA umbrella. The local offices of the Gestapo, known as Gestapo \"Leitstellen\" and \"Stellen\", answered to a local commander known as the \"Inspekteur der Sicherheitspolizei und des SD\" (\"Inspector of the Security Police and Security Service\") who, in turn, was under the dual command of \"Referat N\" of the Gestapo and also his local SS and Police Leader.\n\nThe Gestapo also maintained offices at all Nazi concentration camps, held an office on the staff of the SS and Police Leaders, and supplied personnel as needed to formations such as the \"Einsatzgruppen\". Personnel assigned to these auxiliary duties were often removed from the Gestapo chain of command and fell under the authority of branches of the SS.\n\nThe Gestapo maintained police detective ranks which were used for all officers, both those who were and who were not concurrently SS members.\n\nSources:\n\nMedian annual wage for an industrial worker was 1,495 RM in 1939. In the same year the median salary for a privately employed white-collar worker was 2,772 RM.\n\nIn 1933, there was no purge of the German police forces. The vast majority of Gestapo officers came from the police forces of the Weimar Republic, members of the SS, the SA, and the NSDAP also joined the Gestapo. By March 1937, the Gestapo employed an estimated 6,500 persons in fifty-four regional offices across the Reich. Additional staff were added in March 1938 consequent the annexation of Austria and again in October 1938 with the acquisition of the Sudetenland. In 1939, only 3,000 out of the total of 20,000 Gestapo men held SS ranks, and in most cases, these were honorary. One man who served in the Prussian Gestapo in 1933 recalled that most of his co-workers \"were by no means Nazis. For the most part they were young professional civil service officers ...\" The Nazis valued police competence more than politics, so in general in 1933, almost all of the men who served in the various state police forces under the Weimar Republic stayed on in their jobs. In Würzburg, which is one of the few places in Germany where most of the Gestapo records survived, every member of the Gestapo was a career policeman or had a police background.\n\nThe Canadian historian Robert Gellately wrote that most Gestapo men were not Nazis, but at the same time were not opposed to the Nazi regime, which they were willing to serve, in whatever task they were called upon to perform. Over time, membership in the Gestapo included ideological training, particularly once Werner Best assumed a leading role for training in April 1936. Employing biological metaphors, Best emphasized a doctrine which encouraged members of the Gestapo to view themselves as 'doctors' to the national body in the struggle against \"pathogens\" and \"diseases\"; among the implied sicknesses were \"communists, Freemasons, and the churches—and above and behind all these stood the Jews.\" Heydrich thought along similar lines and advocated both defensive and offensive measures on the part of the Gestapo, so as to prevent any subversion or destruction of the National Socialist body.\n\nWhether trained as police originally or not, Gestapo agents themselves were shaped by their socio-political environment. Historian George C. Browder contends that there was a four-part process (authorization, bolstering, routinization, and dehumanization) in effect which legitimized the psycho-social atmosphere conditioning members of the Gestapo to radicalized violence. Browder also describes a sandwich effect, where from above; Gestapo agents were subjected to ideologically oriented racism and criminal biological theories; and from below, the Gestapo was transformed by SS personnel who did not have the proper police training, which showed in their propensity for unrestrained violence. This admixture certainly shaped the Gestapo's public image which they sought to maintain in lieu of their increasing workload; an image which helped them identify and eliminate enemies of the Nazi state.\n\nFrom June 1936, a concerted effort was made to recruit policemen of the SiPo into the SS, and SS members into the Kripo and especially the Gestapo, but with limited success; by 1939 only a small percentage of Gestapo agents were SS members. With the formation of RSHA in September 1939, Gestapo officers who also held SS rank began to wear the wartime grey SS uniform when on duty in the \"Hauptamt\" or regional headquarters (\"Abschnitte\"). Hollywood notwithstanding, after 1939 the black SS uniform was only worn by \"Allgemeine-SS\" reservists. Outside the central offices, Gestapo agents working out of the \"Stapostellen\" and \"Stapoleitstellen\" continued to wear civilian suits in keeping with the secretive nature of their work.\n\nThere were strict protocols protecting the identity of Gestapo field personnel. When asked for identification, an operative was only required to present his warrant disc. This identified the operative as Gestapo without revealing personal identity and agents, except when ordered to do so by an authorized official, were not required to show picture identification, something all non-Gestapo people were expected to do. Nevertheless, the sight of dark leather coats and black uniforms along with the very mention of the word \"Gestapo\" elicited fear among the general population.\n\nBeginning in 1940, the grey SS uniform was worn by Gestapo in occupied countries, even those who were not actually SS members, because agents in civilian clothes had been shot by members of the \"Wehrmacht\" thinking that they were partisans.\n\nUnlike the rest of the SS, the right-side collar patch of the RSHA was plain black without insignia, as was the uniform cuffband. Gestapo agents in uniform did not wear SS shoulderboards, but rather police-pattern shoulderboards piped or underlaid in \"poison green\" (\"giftgrün\"). A diamond-shaped black patch with \"SD\" in white was worn on the lower left sleeve even by SiPo men who were not actually in the SD. Sometimes this \"Raute\" was piped in white; there is some debate over whether this may or may not have indicated Gestapo personnel.\n\nContrary to popular belief, the Gestapo was not the all-pervasive, omnipotent agency in German society. In Germany proper, many towns and cities had fewer than 50 official Gestapo personnel. For example, in 1939 Stettin and Frankfurt am Main only had a total of 41 Gestapo men combined. In Düsseldorf, the local Gestapo office of only 281 men were responsible for the entire Lower Rhine region, which comprised 4 million people. \"V-men\", as undercover Gestapo agents were known, were used to infiltrate Social Democratic and Communist opposition groups, but this was more the exception, not the rule. The Gestapo office in Saarbrücken had 50 full-term informers in 1939. The District Office in Nuremberg, which had the responsibility for all of northern Bavaria, employed a total of 80–100 full-term informers between 1943 and 1945. The majority of Gestapo informers were not full-term informers working undercover, but were rather ordinary citizens who chose to denounce other people to the Gestapo.\n\nAccording to Canadian historian Robert Gellately's analysis of the local offices established, the Gestapo was—for the most part—made up of bureaucrats and clerical workers who depended upon denunciations by citizens for their information. Gellately argued that it was because of the widespread willingness of Germans to inform on each other to the Gestapo that Germany between 1933 and 1945 was a prime example of panopticism. The Gestapo—at times—was overwhelmed with denunciations and most of its time was spent sorting out the credible from the less credible denunciations. Many of the local offices were understaffed and overworked, struggling with the paper load caused by so many denunciations. Gellately has also suggested that the Gestapo was \"a reactive organisation\" \"... which was constructed within German society and whose functioning was structurally dependent on the continuing co-operation of German citizens\".\n\nAfter 1939, when many Gestapo personnel were called up for war-related work such as service with the \"Einsatzgruppen\", the level of overwork and understaffing at the local offices increased. For information about what was happening in German society, the Gestapo continued to be mostly dependent upon denunciations. 80% of all Gestapo investigations were started in response to information provided by denunciations by ordinary Germans; while 10% were started in response to information provided by other branches of the German government and another 10% started in response to information that the Gestapo itself unearthed. The information supplied by denunciations, often led the Gestapo in determining whom was arrested.\n\nThe popular picture of the Gestapo with its spies everywhere terrorizing German society has been rejected by many historians as a myth invented after the war as a cover for German society's widespread complicity in allowing the Gestapo to work. Work done by social historians such as Detlev Peukert, Robert Gellately, Reinhard Mann, Inge Marssolek, René Otto, Klaus-Michael Mallamann and Paul Gerhard, which by focusing on what the local offices were doing has shown the Gestapos almost total dependence on denunciations from ordinary Germans, and very much discredited the older \"Big Brother\" picture with the Gestapo having its eyes and ears everywhere. For example, of the 84 cases in Würzburg of \"Rassenschande\" (\"race defilement\" – sexual relations with non-Aryans), 45 (54%) were started in response to denunciations by ordinary people, two (2%) by information provided by other branches of the government, 20 (24%) via information gained during interrogations of people relating to other matters, four (5%) from information from (Nazi) NSDAP organisations, two (2%) during \"political evaluations\" and 11 (13%) have no source listed while none were started by Gestapos own \"observations\" of the people of Würzburg.\n\nAn examination of 213 denunciations in Düsseldorf showed that 37% were motivated by personal conflicts, no motive could be established in 39%, and 24% were motivated by support for the Nazi regime. The Gestapo always showed a special interest in denunciations concerning sexual matters, especially cases concerning \"Rassenschande\" with Jews or between Germans and foreigners, in particular Polish slave workers; the Gestapo applied even harsher methods to the foreign workers in the country, especially those from Poland. Jews and Catholicism and homosexuality. As time went by, anonymous denunciations to the Gestapo caused trouble to various NSDAP officials, who often found themselves being investigated by the Gestapo.\n\nOf the political cases, 61 people were investigated for suspicion of belonging to the KPD, 44 for the SPD and 69 for other political parties. Most of the political investigations took place between 1933 and 1935 with the all-time high of 57 cases in 1935. After that year, political investigations declined with only 18 investigations in 1938, 13 in 1939, two in 1941, seven in 1942, four in 1943 and one in 1944. The \"other\" category associated with non-conformity included everything from a man who drew a caricature of Hitler to a Catholic teacher suspected of being lukewarm about teaching National Socialism in his classroom. The \"administrative control\" category concerned whose were breaking the law concerning residency in the city. The \"conventional criminality\" category concerned economic crimes such as money laundering, smuggling and homosexuality.\n\nNormal methods of investigation included various forms of blackmail, threats and extortion to secure \"confessions\". Beyond that, sleep deprivation and various forms of harassment were used as investigative methods. Failing that, torture and planting evidence were common methods of resolving a case, especially if the case concerned someone Jewish. Brutality on the part of interrogators — often prompted by denunciations and followed with roundups — enabled the Gestapo to uncover numerous resistance networks; it also made them seem like the knew everything and could do anything they wanted.\n\nWhile the total numbers of Gestapo officials were limited when contrasted against the represented populations, the average \"Volksgenosse\" (Nazi term for the \"member of the German people\") was typically not under observation, so the statistical ratios between Gestapo officials and inhabitants is \"largely worthless and of little significance\" according to some recent scholars. As historian Eric Johnson remarked, \"The Nazi terror was selective terror,\" with its focus upon political opponents, ideological dissenters (clergy and religious organisations), career criminals, the Sinti and Roma population, handicapped persons, homosexuals and above all, upon the Jews. 'Selective terror' by the Gestapo, as mentioned by Johnson, is also supported by historian Richard Evans who states that, \"Violence and intimidation rarely touched the lives of most ordinary Germans. Denunciation was the exception, not the rule, as far as the behaviour of the vast majority of Germans was concerned.\" The involvement of ordinary Germans in denunciations also needs to be put into perspective so as not to exonerate the Gestapo. As Evans makes clear, \"... it was not the ordinary German people who engaged in surveillance, it was the Gestapo; nothing happened until the Gestapo received a denunciation, and it was the Gestapo's active pursuit of deviance and dissent that was the only thing that gave denunciations meaning.\" The Gestapo's effectiveness remained in the ability to \"project\" omnipotence ... they co-opted the assistance of the German population by using denunciations to their advantage; proving in the end a powerful, ruthless and effective organ of terror under the Nazi regime that was seemingly everywhere. Lastly, the Gestapo's effectiveness, while aided by denunciations and the watchful eye of ordinary Germans, was more the result of the coordination and cooperation amid the various police organs within Germany, the assistance of the SS, and the support provided by the various Nazi Party organisations; all of them together forming an organised persecution network.\n\nBetween 14 November 1945 and 3 October 1946, the Allies established an International Military Tribunal (IMT) to try 22 of 24 major Nazi war criminals and six groups for crimes against peace, war crimes and crimes against humanity. Nineteen of the 22 were convicted, and twelve of them (Bormann [in absentia], Frank, Frick, Göring, Jodl, Kaltenbrunner, Keitel, Ribbentrop, Rosenberg, Sauckel, Seyss-Inquart, Streicher), were each given the death penalty; the remaining three (Funk, Hess, Raeder) received life terms. At that time, the Gestapo was condemned as a criminal organisation, along with the SS. However, Gestapo leader Heinrich Müller was never tried, as he disappeared at the end of the war.\n\nLeaders, organisers, investigators and accomplices participating in the formulation or execution of a common plan or conspiracy to commit the crimes specified were declared responsible for all acts performed by any persons in execution of such plan. The official positions of defendants as heads of state or holders of high government offices were not to free them from responsibility or mitigate their punishment; nor was the fact that a defendant acted pursuant to an order of a superior to excuse him from responsibility, although it might be considered by the IMT in mitigation of punishment.\n\nAt the trial of any individual member of any group or organisation, the IMT was authorised to declare (in connection with any act of which the individual was convicted) that the group or organisation to which he belonged was a criminal organisation. When a group or organisation was thus declared criminal, the competent national authority of any signatory had the right to bring persons to trial for membership in that organisation, with the criminal nature of the group or organisation assumed proved.\n\nThese groups—the Nazi party and government leadership, the German General staff and High Command (OKW); the \"Sturmabteilung\" (SA); the \"Schutzstaffel\" (SS), including the \"Sicherheitsdienst\" (SD); and the Gestapo—had an aggregate membership exceeding two million, making a large number of their members liable to trial when the organisations were convicted.\n\nThe trials began in November 1945. On 1 October 1946, the IMT rendered its judgement on 21 top Nazi figures: 18 were sentenced to death or to long prison terms, and three acquitted. The IMT also convicted three of the groups: the Nazi leadership corps, the SS (including the SD) and the Gestapo. Gestapo members Hermann Göring, Ernst Kaltenbrunner and Arthur Seyss-Inquart were individually convicted. Three groups were acquitted of collective war crimes charges, but this did not relieve individual members of those groups from conviction and punishment under the denazification programme. Members of the three convicted groups were subject to apprehension by Britain, the United States, the Soviet Union and France.\n\nIn 1997, Cologne transformed the former regional Gestapo headquarters in Cologne—the EL-DE Haus—into a museum to document the Gestapo's actions.\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "12899", "title": "Gestapo"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12900", "text": "Grammatical conjugation\n\nIn linguistics, conjugation () is the creation of derived forms of a verb from its principal parts by inflection (alteration of form according to rules of grammar). Conjugation may be affected by person, number, gender, tense, aspect, mood, voice, and/or other grammatical categories such as possession, definiteness, politeness, causativity, clusivity, interrogativity, transitivity, valency, polarity, telicity, volition, mirativity, evidentiality, associativity, pluractionality, agreement, polypersonal agreement, incorporation, noun class, noun classifiers, and verb classifiers in some languages. Agglutinative and polysynthetic languages tend to have the most complex conjugations albeit some fusional languages like Archi can also have extremely complex conjugation. Typically the principal parts are the root and/or several modifications of it (stems). All the different forms of the same verb constitute a lexeme, and the canonical form of the verb that is conventionally used to represent that lexeme (as seen in dictionary entries) is called a lemma.\n\nThe term conjugation is applied only to the inflection of verbs, and not of other parts of speech (inflection of nouns and adjectives is known as declension). Also it is often restricted to denoting the formation of finite forms of a verb – these may be referred to as \"conjugated forms\", as opposed to non-finite forms, such as the infinitive or gerund, which tend not to be marked for most of the grammatical categories.\n\nConjugation is also the traditional name for a group of verbs that share a similar conjugation pattern in a particular language (a \"verb class\"). For example, Latin is said to have four conjugations of verbs. This means that any regular Latin verb can be conjugated in any person, number, tense, mood, and voice by knowing which of the four conjugation groups it belongs to, and its principal parts. A verb that does not follow all of the standard conjugation patterns of the language is said to be an irregular verb. The system of all conjugated variants of a particular verb or class of verbs is called a verb paradigm; this may be presented in the form of a conjugation table.\n\nIndo-European languages usually inflect verbs for several grammatical categories in complex paradigms, although some, like English, have simplified verb conjugation to a large extent. Below is the conjugation of the verb \"to be\" in the present tense (of the infinitive, if it exists, and indicative moods), in English, German, Yiddish, Dutch, Afrikaans, Icelandic, Faroese, Swedish, Norwegian, Latvian, Bulgarian, Bosnian, Serbian, Croatian, Polish, Slovenian, Macedonian, Urdu or Hindi, Persian, Latin, French, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, Russian, Albanian, Armenian, Irish, Ukrainian, Ancient Attic Greek and Modern Greek. This is usually the most irregular verb. The similarities in corresponding verb forms may be noticed. Some of the conjugations may be disused, like the English \"thou\"-form, or have additional meanings, like the English \"you\"-form, which can also stand for second person singular or be impersonal.\n\nVerbal agreement or concord is a morpho-syntactic construct in which properties of the subject and/or objects of a verb are indicated by the verb form. Verbs are then said to agree with their subjects (resp. objects).\n\nMany English verbs exhibit subject agreement of the following sort: whereas \"I go\", \"you go\", \"we go\", \"they go\" are all grammatical in standard English, \"she go\" is not (except in the subjunctive, as \"They requested that \"she go\" with them\"). Instead, a special form of the verb \"to go\" has to be used to produce \"she goes\". On the other hand \"I goes\", \"you goes\" etc. are not grammatical in standard English. (Things are different in some English dialects that lack agreement.) A few English verbs have no special forms that indicate subject agreement (\"I may\", \"you may\", \"she may\"), and the verb \"to be\" has an additional form \"am\" that can only be used with the pronoun \"I\" as the subject.\n\nVerbs in written French exhibit more intensive agreement morphology than English verbs: \"je suis\" (I am), \"tu es\" (\"you are\", singular informal), \"elle est\" (she is), \"nous sommes\" (we are), \"vous êtes\" (\"you are\", plural), \"ils sont\" (they are). Historically, English used to have a similar verbal paradigm. Some historic verb forms are used by Shakespeare as slightly archaic or more formal variants (\"I do\", \"thou dost\", \"she doth\", typically used by nobility) of the modern forms.\n\nSome languages with verbal agreement can leave certain subjects implicit when the subject is fully determined by the verb form. In Spanish, for instance, subject pronouns do not need to be explicitly present, even though in French, its close relative, they are obligatory. The Spanish equivalent to the French \"je suis\" (I am) can be simply \"soy\" (lit. \"am\"). The pronoun \"yo\" (I) in the explicit form \"yo soy\" is only required for emphasis or to clear ambiguity in complex texts.\n\nSome languages have a richer agreement system in which verbs also agree with some or all of their objects. Ubykh exhibits verbal agreement for the subject, direct object, indirect object, benefaction and ablative objects (\"a.w3.s.xe.n.t'u.n\", \"you gave it to him for me\").\n\nBasque can show agreement not only for subject, direct object and indirect object, but it also on occasion exhibits agreement for the listener as the implicit benefactor: \"autoa ekarri digute\" means \"they brought us the car\" (neuter agreement for listener), but \"autoa ekarri ziguten\" means \"they brought us the car\" (agreement for feminine singular listener).\n\nLanguages with a rich agreement morphology facilitate relatively free word order without leading to increased ambiguity. The canonical word order in Basque is subject–object–verb. However, all permutations of subject, verb and object are permitted.\n\nIn some languages, predicative adjectives and copular complements receive a form of person agreement that is distinct from that used on ordinary predicative verbs. Although this is a form of conjugation in that it refers back to the person of the subject, it is not “verbal” because it always derives from pronouns that have become cliticised to the nouns to which they refer. An example of nonverbal person agreement, along with contrasting verbal conjugation, can be found from Beja (person agreement affixes in bold):\n\n\nAnother example can be found from Ket:\n\n\nIn Turkic, and a few Uralic and Australian Aboriginal languages, predicative adjectives and copular complements take affixes that are identical to those used on predicative verbs, but their negation is different. For example, in Turkish:\n\n\nUnder negation this becomes (negative affixes in bold):\n\n\nFor this reason, the person agreement affixes used with predicative adjectives and nominals in Turkic languages are considered to be nonverbal in character. In some analyses, they are viewed as a form of verbal takeover by a copular strategy.\n\nCommon grammatical categories according to which verbs can be conjugated are the following:\n\nOther factors which may affect conjugation are:\n\n\n", "id": "12900", "title": "Grammatical conjugation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12902", "text": "Gomoku\n\nGomoku is an abstract strategy board game. Also called Gobang or Five in a Row, it is traditionally played with Go pieces (black and white stones) on a go board with 19x19 (15x15) intersections; however, because pieces are not moved or removed from the board, gomoku may also be played as a paper and pencil game. This game is known in several countries under different names.\n\nBlack plays first if white did not win in the previous game, and players alternate in placing a stone of their color on an empty intersection. The winner is the first player to get an unbroken row of five stones horizontally, vertically, or diagonally.\n\nIt originated in Japan during the Heian period. The name \"Gomoku\" is from the Japanese language, in which it is referred to as . \"Go\" means five, \"moku\" is a counter word for pieces and \"narabe\" means \"line-up\". The game is also popular in Korea, where it is called \"omok\" (오목 [五目]) which has the same structure and origin as the Japanese name.\n\nThe Japanese call this game Go-moku (five stones). In the nineteenth century, the game was introduced to Britain where it was known as Go Bang, said to be a corruption of the Japanese word \"goban\", said to be adopted from Chinese \"k'i pan (qí pán)\" \"chess-board.\"\n\nBesides many variations around the world, the \"Swap2\" rule (based on \"swap\" from Renju) is currently adapted in tournaments among professional players. The first player places 3 stones (2 black 1 white, if black goes first) on the board, the second player has the choice to take black/white or to place 2 more stones to change the shape and let the first player choose color. This is essentially a slightly more elaborate pie rule.\n\nSwap2 solved the low complexity problem and makes the game fairer. Like other rules and variations, 100% fairness can be reached by playing two alternating games for each point.\n\nBlack (the player who makes the first move) was long known to have a big advantage, even before L. Victor Allis proved that black could force a win (see below). So a number of variations are played with extra rules that aimed to reduce black's advantage.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\nComputer search by L. Victor Allis has shown that on a 15×15 board, black wins with perfect play. This applies regardless of whether overlines are considered as wins, but it assumes that the rule of three and three is not used. It seems very likely that black wins on larger boards too. In any size of a board, freestyle gomoku is an \"m\",\"n\",\"k\"-game, and it is known that the second player does not win. With perfect play, either the first player wins or the result is a draw.\n\nReich proved that Generalized gomoku is PSPACE-complete. He also observed that the reduction can be adapted to the rules of k-in-a-Row for fixed k. Although he did not specify exactly which values of k are allowed, the reduction would appear to generalize to any k ≥ 5.\n\nThis game on the 15×15 board is adapted from the paper \"Go-Moku and Threat-Space Search\".\n\nThe opening moves show clearly black's advantage. An open row of three (one that is not blocked by an opponent's stone at either end) has to be blocked immediately, or countered with a threat elsewhere on the board. If not blocked or countered, the open row of three will be extended to an open row of four, which threatens to win in two ways.\n\nWhite has to block open rows of three at moves 10, 14, 16 and 20, but black only has to do so at move 9.\nMove 20 is a blunder for white (it should have been played next to black 19). Black can now force a win against any defence by white, starting with move 21.\nThere are two forcing sequences for black, depending on whether white 22 is played next to black 15 or black 21. The diagram on the right shows the first sequence. All the moves for white are forced. Such long forcing sequences are typical in gomoku, and expert players can read out forcing sequences of 20 to 40 moves rapidly and accurately.\nThe diagram on the right shows the second forcing sequence. This diagram shows why white 20 was a blunder; if it had been next to black 19 (at the position of move 32 in this diagram) then black 31 would not be a threat and so the forcing sequence would fail.\n\nWorld Championships in Gomoku have occurred 2 times in 1989, 1991.\nSince 2009 the tournament resumed, the opening rule being played was changed and now is swap2.\n\nList of the tournaments occurred and title holders follows.\n\nPeople have been applying the artificial intelligence technique on playing gomoku for several decades. In 1994, L. V. Allis raised the algorithm of proof-number search (pn-search) and dependency-based search (db-search), and proved that when starting from an empty board, the first player has a winning strategy using these searching algorithms. In 2001, the winning strategy was also approved for renju, a variation of gomoku, when there was no limitation on the opening stage.\n\nHowever, neither the theoretical values of all legal positions, nor the balanced rules used by the professional gomoku players have been solved yet, so the topic of gomoku artificial intelligence is still a great challenge for computer scientists, such as the problem on how to improve the gomoku AIs to make it more strategic and competitive. Nowadays, most of the state-of-the-art gomoku AIs are based on the alpha-beta pruning framework.\n\nThere exist several well-known tournaments for gomoku AIs since 1989. The Computer Olympiad started with the gomoku game in 1989, but gomoku has not been in the list since 1993. The Renju World Computer Championship was started in 1991, and held for 4 times until 2004. The Gomocup tournament is played since 2000 and taking place every year, still active now, with more than 30 participants from about 10 countries. The Hungarian Computer Go-Moku Tournament was also played twice in 2005. There were also two AI vs. Human tournament played in the Czech Republic in 2006 and 2011.\n\n\n\n", "id": "12902", "title": "Gomoku"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12903", "text": "Gegenschein\n\nGegenschein ( German for \"countershine\") is a faint brightening of the night sky in the region of the antisolar point.\n\nLike the zodiacal light, the gegenschein is sunlight scattered by interplanetary dust. Most of this dust is orbiting the Sun in about the ecliptic plane, with a possible concentration of particles at the Earth–Sun Lagrangian point.\n\nIt is distinguished from zodiacal light by its high angle of reflection of the incident sunlight on the dust particles. It forms a slightly more luminous, oval glow directly opposite the Sun within the band of luminous zodiacal light. The intensity of the gegenschein is relatively enhanced, because each dust particle is seen in full phase.\n\nThe gegenschein was first described by the French Jesuit astronomer and professor (1692–1776) in 1730. Further observations were made by the German explorer Alexander von Humboldt during his South American journey from 1799 to 1803. It was also Humboldt who gave the phenomenon its German name Gegenschein.\n\nThe Danish astronomer Theodor Brorsen published the first thorough investigations of the gegenschein in 1854.\n\nIn modern times, the gegenschein is not visible in most inhabited regions of the world due to light pollution. \n\n\n", "id": "12903", "title": "Gegenschein"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12904", "text": "Glyph\n\nIn typography, a glyph is an elemental symbol within an agreed set of symbols, intended to represent a readable character for the purposes of writing. As such, glyphs are considered to be unique marks that collectively add up to the spelling of a word, or otherwise contribute to a specific meaning of what is written, with that meaning dependent on cultural and social usage.\n\nFor example, in most languages written in any variety of the Latin alphabet the dot on a lower-case \"i\" is not a glyph because it does not convey any distinction, and an \"i\" in which the dot has been accidentally omitted is still likely to be recognized correctly. In Turkish, however, it is a glyph because that language has two distinct versions of the letter \"i\", with and without a dot.\n\nIn Japanese syllabaries, a number of the characters are made up of more than one separate mark, but in general these separate marks are not glyphs because they have no meaning by themselves. However, in some cases, additional marks fulfill the role of diacritics, to differentiate distinct characters. Such additional marks constitute glyphs.\n\nIn general, a diacritic is a glyph, even if (like a cedilla in French, the ogonek in several languages or the stroke on a Polish \"Ł\") it is contiguous with the rest of the character.\n\nSome characters, such as \"æ\" in Icelandic and the \"ß\" in German, would probably be regarded as glyphs: they were originally ligatures but over time have become characters in their own right, and these languages treat them as separate letters. However, a ligature such as \"ſi\", which is treated in some typefaces as a single unit, is arguably not a glyph as this is just a quirk of the typeface, essentially an allographic feature, and includes more than one grapheme. In normal handwriting, even long words are often written \"joined up\", without the pen leaving the paper, and the form of each written letter will often vary depending on which letters precede and follow it, but that does not make the whole word into a single glyph.\n\nTwo or more glyphs which have the same significance, whether used interchangeably or chosen depending on context, are called allographs of each other.\n\nThe term has been used in English since 1727, borrowed from \"glyphe\" (in use by French antiquaries since 1701), from the Greek γλυφή, \"glyphē\", \"carving,\" and the verb γλύφειν, \"glýphein\", \"to hollow out, engrave, carve\" (cognate with Latin \"glubere\" \"to peel\" and English \"cleave\").\n\nThe word \"hieroglyph\" (Greek for sacred writing) has a longer history in English, dating from the first Elizabethan translation of Plutarch, who adopted hieroglyphic as a Latin adjective.\n\nThe word \"glyph\" first came to widespread European attention with the engravings and lithographs from Frederick Catherwood's drawings of undeciphered glyphs of the Maya civilization in the early 1840s.\n\nIn archaeology, a glyph is a carved or inscribed symbol. It may be a pictogram or ideogram, or part of a writing system such as a syllable, or a logogram. In 1897 Dana Evans discovered glyphs written on rocks in the Colorado Desert. These ancient characters have been called the most enlightening discovery in Native American History in the 19th Century.\n\nIn typography, a glyph has a slightly different definition: it is \"the specific shape, design, or representation of a character\". It is a particular graphical representation, in a particular typeface, of an element of written language, which could be a grapheme, or part of a grapheme, or sometimes several graphemes in combination (a composed glyph). If there is more than one allograph of a unit of writing, and the choice between them depends on context or on the preference of the author, they now have to be treated as separate glyphs, because mechanical arrangements have to be available to differentiate between them and to print whichever of them is required. The same is true in computing. In computing as well as typography, the term \"character\" refers to a grapheme or grapheme-like unit of text, as found in natural language writing systems (\"scripts\"). In typography and computing, the range of graphemes is broader than in a written language in other ways too: a typographical font often has to cope with a range of different languages each of which contribute their own graphemes, and it may also be required to print other symbols such as dingbats. The range of glyphs required increases correspondingly. In summary, in typography and computing, a glyph is a graphical unit.\n\nIn graphonomics, the term glyph is used for a noncharacter, i.e. either a subcharacter or multicharacter pattern. Most typographic glyphs originate from the characters of a typeface. In a typeface each character typically corresponds to a single glyph, but there are exceptions, such as a font used for a language with a large alphabet or complex writing system, where one character may correspond to several glyphs, or several characters to one glyph.\n\n\n\n", "id": "12904", "title": "Glyph"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12905", "text": "Goth subculture\n\nThe goth subculture is a contemporary subculture found in many countries. It began in England during the early 1980s in the gothic rock scene, an offshoot of the post-punk genre. Notable post-punk groups that presaged that genre are Siouxsie and the Banshees, Joy Division and Bauhaus. The goth subculture has survived much longer than others of the same era, and has continued to diversify. Its imagery and cultural proclivities indicate influences from the 19th century Gothic literature along with horror films.\n\nThe goth subculture has associated tastes in music, aesthetics, and fashion. The music of the goth subculture encompasses a number of different styles, including gothic rock, industrial, deathrock, post-punk, darkwave, ethereal wave and neoclassical. Styles of dress within the subculture range from deathrock, punk and Victorian styles, or combinations of the above, most often with dark attire (often black), pale face makeup and black hair. The scene continues to draw interest from a large audience decades after its emergence. In Western Europe, there are large annual festivals, mainly in Germany.\n\nThe term \"gothic rock\" was coined in 1967 by music critic John Stickney to describe a meeting he had with Jim Morrison in a dimly lit wine-cellar which he called \"the perfect room to honor the Gothic rock of the Doors\". That same year, Velvet Underground with a track like \"All Tomorrow's Parties\", created a kind of \"mesmerizing gothic-rock masterpiece\" according to music historian Kurt Loder. In the late 1970s, the \"gothic\" adjective was used to describe the atmosphere of post-punk bands like Siouxsie and the Banshees, Magazine and Joy Division. In a live review about a Siouxsie and the Banshees' concert in July 1978, critic Nick Kent wrote that concerning their music, \"parallels and comparisons can now be drawn with gothic rock architects like the Doors and, certainly, early Velvet Underground\". In March 1979, in his review of Magazine's second album \"Secondhand Daylight\", Kent noted that there was \"a new austere sense of authority\" in the music, with a \"dank neo-Gothic sound\". Later that year, the term was also used by Joy Division's manager, Tony Wilson on 15 September in an interview for the BBC TV programme's \"Something Else\": Wilson described Joy Division as \"gothic\" compared to the pop mainstream, right before a live performance of the band. The term was later applied to \"newer bands such as Bauhaus who had arrived in the wake of Joy Division and Siouxsie and the Banshees\". Bauhaus's first single issued in 1979, \"Bela Lugosi's Dead\", is generally credited as the starting point of the gothic rock genre.\n\nIn 1979, \"Sounds\" described Joy Division as \"Gothic\" and \"theatrical\". In February 1980, \"Melody Maker\" qualified the same band as \"masters of this Gothic gloom\". Critic Jon Savage would later say that their singer Ian Curtis wrote \"the definitive Northern Gothic statement\". However, it was not until the early 1980s that gothic rock became a coherent music subgenre within post-punk, and that followers of these bands started to come together as a distinctly recognisable movement. They may have taken the \"goth\" mantle from a 1981 article published in UK rock weekly \"Sounds\": \"The face of Punk Gothique\", written by Steve Keaton. In a text about the audience of UK Decay, Keaton asked: \"Could this be the coming of Punk Gothique? With Bauhaus flying in on similar wings could it be the next big thing?\". In July 1982, the opening of the Batcave in London's Soho provided a prominent meeting point for the emerging scene, which would be briefly labelled \"positive punk\" by the \"NME\" in a special issue with a front cover in early 1983. The term \"Batcaver\" was then used to describe old-school goths.\nIndependent from the British scene, in the late 1970s and early 1980s in California, deathrock developed as a distinct branch of American punk rock, with acts such as Christian Death and 45 Grave.\n\nThe bands that defined and embraced the gothic rock genre included Bauhaus, early Adam and the Ants, The Cure, The Birthday Party, Southern Death Cult, Specimen, Sex Gang Children, UK Decay, Virgin Prunes, Killing Joke and the later incarnations of The Damned. Near the peak of this first generation of the gothic scene in 1983, \"The Face\"'s Paul Rambali recalled that there were \"several strong Gothic characteristics\" in the music of Joy Division. In 1984, Joy Division's bassist Peter Hook named Play Dead as one of their heirs:\n\nIf you listen to a band like Play Dead, who I really like, Joy Division played the same stuff that Play Dead are playing. They're similar.\n\nBy the mid-1980s, bands began proliferating and became increasingly popular, including The Sisters of Mercy, The Mission (known as The Mission UK in the U.S.), Alien Sex Fiend, The March Violets, Xmal Deutschland, The Membranes and Fields of Nephilim. Record labels like Factory, 4AD and Beggars Banquet released much of this music in Europe, and through a vibrant import music market in the U.S., the subculture grew, especially in New York and Los Angeles, California, where many nightclubs featured \"gothic/industrial\" nights. The popularity of 4AD bands resulted in the creation of a similar U.S. label, Projekt, which produces what was colloquially termed ethereal wave, a subgenre of dark wave music.\n\nThe 1990s saw further growth for some 1980s bands and the emergence of many new acts, as well as new goth-centric U.S. record labels such as Cleopatra Records, among others. According to Dave Simpson of The Guardian, \"in the 90s, goths all but disappeared as dance music became the dominant youth cult.\" As a result, the goth \"movement went underground and mistaken for cyber goth, Shock rock, Industrial metal, Gothic metal, Medieval folk metal and the latest subgenre, horror punk.\" Marilyn Manson was seen as a \"goth-shock icon\" by \"Spin\".\n\nThe Goth subculture of the 1980s drew inspiration from a variety of sources. Some of them were modern or contemporary, others were centuries-old or ancient. Lauren M. E. Goodlad and Michael Bibby liken the subculture to a bricolage. Among the music subcultures that influenced it were Punk, New wave, and Glam. But it also drew inspiration from B movies, Gothic literature, horror films, vampire cults, Neo-noir science fiction film's such as Ridley Scott's \"Blade Runner\", and traditional mythology. Among the mythologies that proved influential in Goth were Celtic mythology, Christian mythology, Egyptian mythology, and various traditions of Paganism.\n\nThe figures that the movement counted among its historic canon of ancestors were equally diverse. They included the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood, Friedrich Nietzsche (1844-1900), Comte de Lautréamont (1846-1870), Salvador Dalí (1904-1989) and Jean-Paul Sartre (1905-1980). Writers that have had a significant influence on the movement also represent a diverse canon. They include Ann Radcliffe (1764-1823), John William Polidori (1795-1821), Edgar Allan Poe (1809-1849), Sheridan Le Fanu (1814-1873), Bram Stoker (1847-1912), Oscar Wilde (1854-1900), H. P. Lovecraft (1890-1937), Anne Rice (1941-), William Gibson (1948-), Ian McEwan (1948-), Storm Constantine (1956-), and Poppy Z. Brite (1967-).\n\nGothic literature is a genre of fiction that combines romance and dark elements to produce mystery, suspense, terror, horror and the supernatural. According to David H. Richter, settings were framed to take place at \"…ruinous castles, gloomy churchyards, claustrophobic monasteries, and lonely mountain roads.\" Typical characters consisted of the cruel parent, sinister priest, courageous victor, and the helpless heroine, along with supernatural figures such as demons, vampires, ghosts, and monsters. Often, the plot focused on characters ill-fated, internally conflicted, and innocently victimized by harassing malicious figures. In addition to the dismal plot focuses, the literary tradition of the gothic was to also focus on individual characters that were gradually going insane.\n\nEnglish author Horace Walpole, with his 1764 novel \"The Castle of Otranto\" is one of the first writers who explored this genre. The American Revolutionary War-era \"American Gothic\" story of the Headless Horseman, immortalized in \"The Legend of Sleepy Hollow\" (published in 1820) by Washington Irving, marked the arrival in the New World of dark, romantic storytelling. The tale was composed by Irving while he was living in England, and was based on popular tales told by colonial Dutch settlers of the Hudson Valley, New York. The story would be adapted to film in 1922 and 1949 in the animated \"The Adventures of Ichabod and Mr. Toad\".\n\nThroughout the evolution of the goth subculture, classic romantic, Gothic and horror literature has played a significant role. E.T.A. Hoffmann (1776–1822), Edgar Allan Poe (1809–1849), Charles Baudelaire (1821–1867), H. P. Lovecraft (1890–1937), and other tragic and romantic writers have become as emblematic of the subculture as the use of dark eyeliner or dressing in black. Baudelaire, in fact, in his preface to \"Les Fleurs du mal\" (\"Flowers of Evil\") penned lines that could serve as a sort of goth malediction:\n\n<poem>\"C'est l'Ennui! —l'œil chargé d'un pleur involontaire,\"\n\"Il rêve d'échafauds en fumant son houka.\"\n\"Tu le connais, lecteur, ce monstre délicat,\"\n\"—Hypocrite lecteur,—mon semblable,—mon frère!\"\n\nIt is Boredom! — an eye brimming with an involuntary tear,\nHe dreams of the gallows while smoking his water-pipe.\nYou know him, reader, this delicate monster,\n—Hypocrite reader,—my twin,—my brother!</poem>\n\nThe gothic subculture has influenced different artists—not only musicians—but also painters and photographers. In particular their work is based on mystic, morbid and romantic motifs. In photography and painting the spectrum varies from erotic artwork to romantic images of vampires or ghosts. There is a marked preference for dark colours and sentiments, similar to Gothic fiction. At the end of the 19th century, painters like John Everett Millais and John Ruskin invented a new kind of Gothic.\n\nBy the 1960s, television series such as \"The Addams Family\" and \"The Munsters\" used Gothic-derived stereotypes for camp comedy. The Byronic hero, in particular, was a key precursor to the male goth image , while Dracula's iconic portrayal by Bela Lugosi appealed powerfully to early goths. They were attracted by Lugosi's aura of camp menace, elegance and mystique. Some people credit the band Bauhaus' first single \"Bela Lugosi's Dead\", released in August 1979, with the start of the goth subculture, though many prior arthouse movements influenced gothic fashion and style, the illustrations and paintings of Swiss artist H. R. Giger being one of the earliest.\n\nNotable examples of goth icons include several bandleaders: Siouxsie Sioux of Siouxsie and the Banshees, Robert Smith of The Cure, Peter Murphy of Bauhaus, Rozz Williams of Christian Death, Ian Curtis of Joy Division,and Dave Vanian of The Damned. Some members of Bauhaus were, themselves, fine art students or active artists. Nick Cave was dubbed as \"the grand lord of gothic lushness\". Nico is also a notable icon of goth fashion and music, with pioneering records like \"The Marble Index\" and \"Desertshore\" and the persona she adopted after their release.\n\nGothic fashion is stereotyped as conspicuously dark, eerie, mysterious, complex and exotic. Goth fashion can be recognized by its stark black clothing. Typical gothic fashion includes dyed black hair, dark eyeliner, black fingernails and black period-styled clothing; goths may or may not have piercings. Styles are often borrowed from the Elizabethan, Victorian or medieval period and often express pagan, occult or other religious imagery.\n\nTed Polhemus described goth fashion as a \"profusion of black velvets, lace, fishnets and leather tinged with scarlet or purple, accessorized with tightly laced corsets, gloves, precarious stilettos and silver jewelry depicting religious or occult themes\". Researcher Maxim W. Furek stated that \"Goth is a revolt against the slick fashions of the 1970s disco era and a protest against the colorful pastels and extravagance of the 1980s. Black hair, dark clothing and pale complexions provide the basic look of the Goth Dresser. One can paradoxically argue that the Goth look is one of deliberate overstatement as just a casual look at the heavy emphasis on dark flowing capes, ruffled cuffs, pale makeup and dyed hair demonstrate a modern-day version of late Victorian excess.\" Gothic fashion may also feature silver jewelry.\n\nThe \"New York Times\" noted: \"The costumes and ornaments are a glamorous cover for the genre's somber themes. In the world of Goth, nature itself lurks as a malign protagonist, causing flesh to rot, rivers to flood, monuments to crumble and women to turn into slatterns, their hair streaming and lipstick askew\". Present-day fashion designers such as John Paul Gaultier, Alexander McQueen, and John Galliano have also been described as practising \"haute goth\".\n\nSome of the early gothic rock and deathrock artists adopted traditional horror film images and drew on horror film soundtracks for inspiration. Their audiences responded by adopting appropriate dress and props. Use of standard horror film props like swirling smoke, rubber bats, and cobwebs featured as gothic club décor from the beginning in The Batcave. Such references in bands' music and images were originally tongue-in-cheek, but as time went on, bands and members of the subculture took the connection more seriously. As a result, morbid, supernatural and occult themes became more noticeably serious in the subculture. The interconnection between horror and goth was highlighted in its early days by \"The Hunger\", a 1983 vampire film starring David Bowie, Catherine Deneuve and Susan Sarandon. The film featured gothic rock group Bauhaus performing \"Bela Lugosi's Dead\" in a nightclub. Tim Burton created a storybook atmosphere filled with darkness and shadow in some of his films like \"Beetlejuice\" (1988), \"Batman\" (1989), \"Edward Scissorhands\" (1990), and the stop motion films \"The Nightmare Before Christmas\" (1993), which was produced/co-written by Burton, and \"Corpse Bride\" (2005), which he co-produced.\n\nAs the subculture became well-established, the connection between goth and horror fiction became almost a cliché, with goths quite likely to appear as characters in horror novels and film. For example, \"The Crow\", \"The Matrix\" and \"Underworld\" film series drew directly on goth music and style. The dark comedy \"Beetlejuice\", \"The Faculty\", \"American Beauty\", \"Wedding Crashers\" and a few episodes of the animated TV show \"South Park\" portray or parody the goth subculture. In \"South Park\", several of the fictional schoolchildren are depicted as goths. The goth kids on the show are depicted as finding it annoying to be confused with the Hot Topic \"vampire\" kids from the episode \"The Ungroundable\" in season 12. and even more frustrating to be compared with emo kids. The goth kids are usually depicted listening to goth music, writing or reading Gothic poetry, drinking coffee, flipping their hair and smoking.\n\nA prominent American literary influence on the gothic scene was provided by Anne Rice's re-imagining of the vampire in 1976. In \"The Vampire Chronicles\", Rice's characters were depicted as self-tormentors who struggled with alienation, loneliness, and the human condition. Not only did the characters torment themselves, but they also depicted a surreal world that focused on uncovering its splendor. These Chronicles assumed goth attitudes, but they were not intentionally created to represent the gothic subculture. Their romance, beauty, and erotic appeal attracted\nmany goth readers, making her works popular from the 1980s through the 1990s. While Goth has embraced Vampire literature both in its 19th-century form and in its later incarnations, Rice's postmodern take on the vampire mythos has had a \"special resonance\" in the subculture. Her vampire novels feature intense emotions, period clothing, and \"cultured decadence\". Her vampires are socially alienated monsters, but they are also stunningly attractive. Rice's goth readers tend to envision themselves in much the same terms and view characters like Lestat de Lioncourt as role models.\n\nThe re-imagining of the vampire continued with the release of Poppy Z. Brite's book \"Lost Souls\" in October 1992. Despite the fact that Brite's first novel was criticized by some mainstream sources for allegedly \"lack[ing] a moral center: neither terrifyingly malevolent supernatural creatures nor (like Anne Rice's protagonists) tortured souls torn between good and evil, these vampires simply add blood-drinking to the amoral panoply of drug abuse, problem drinking and empty sex practiced by their human counterparts\", many of these so-called \"human counterparts\" identified with the teen angst and goth music references therein, keeping the book in print. Upon release of a special 10th anniversary edition of \"Lost Souls\", \"Publishers Weekly\"—the same periodical that criticized the novel's \"amorality\" a decade prior—deemed it a \"modern horror classic\" and acknowledged that Brite established a \"cult audience\".\n\nNeil Gaiman's acclaimed graphic novel series \"The Sandman\" influenced goths with characters like the dark, brooding Dream and his sister Death.\n\nThe 2002 release \"21st Century Goth\" by Mick Mercer, an author, noted music journalist and leading historian of gothic rock, explored the modern state of the goth scene around the world, including South America, Japan, and mainland Asia. His previous 1997 release, \"Hex Files: The Goth Bible\", similarly took an international look at the subculture.\n\nIn the US, \"Propaganda\" was a gothic subculture magazine founded in 1982. In Italy, \"Ver Sacrum\" covers the Italian goth scene, including fashion, sexuality, music, art and literature. Some magazines, such as the now-defunct \"Dark Realms\" and \"Goth Is Dead\" included goth fiction and poetry. Other magazines cover fashion (e.g., \"Gothic Beauty\"); music (e.g., \"Severance\") or culture and lifestyle (e.g., \"Althaus\" e-zine).\n\nVisual contemporary graphic artists with this aesthetic include Gerald Brom, Luis Royo, Dave McKean, Trevor Brown, Victoria Francés, as well as illustrators Edward Gorey, Charles Addams, Lorin Morgan-Richards and James O'Barr. H. R. Giger of Switzerland is one of the first graphic artists to make serious contributions to the gothic/industrial look of much of modern cinema with his work on the 1979 film \"Alien\" by Ridley Scott. The artwork of Polish surrealist painter Zdzisław Beksiński is often described as gothic. British artist Anne Sudworth published a book on gothic art in 2007.\n\nThe goth scene continues to exist in the 2010s. In Western Europe, there are large annual festivals mainly in Germany, including Wave-Gotik-Treffen (Leipzig) and M'era Luna (Hildesheim), both annually attracting tens of thousands of attendees. The Lumous Gothic Festival (more commonly known as Lumous) is the largest festival dedicated to the goth subculture in Finland and the northernmost gothic festival in the world. The Ukrainian festival \"Deti Nochi: Chorna Rada\" (Children of the night) is the biggest gothic event in the Ukraine. Goth events like \"Ghoul School\" and \"Release the Bats\" promote deathrock and are attended by fans from many countries, and events such as the Drop Dead Festival in the U.S. attract attendees from over 30 countries. The Whitby Goth Weekend is a twice-yearly goth music festival in Whitby, North Yorkshire, England. In the US, events such as Bats Day in the Fun Park celebrate the culture, as well as the Goth Cruise, and the Gothic Cruise.\n\nSince the late 1970s, the UK goth scene refused \"traditional standards of sexual propriety\" and accepted and celebrated \"unusual, bizarre or deviant sexual practices.\" In the 2000s, many members \"...claim overlapping memberships in the queer, polyamorous, bondage-discipline/sadomasochism, and pagan communities.\"\n\nWomen in the goth scene tend to be more independent: The \"...[s]cene's celebration of active sexuality\" enables goth women \"...to resist mainstream notions of passive femininity.\" They have an \"active sexuality\" approach which creates \"gender egalitarianism\" within the scene, as it \"allows them to engage in sexual play with multiple partners while sidestepping most of the stigma and dangers that women who engage in such behavior\" outside the scene frequently incur, while continuing to \"...see themselves as strong.\" \n\nMen dress up in androgynous way: \"...Men \"gender blend,\" wearing makeup and skirts\". In contrast, the \"...women are dressed in sexy feminine outfits\" that are \"...highly sexualized\" and which often combine \"...corsets with short skirts and fishnet stockings.\" Androgyny is common among the scene: \"...androgyny in Goth subcultural style often disguises or even functions to reinforce conventional gender roles.\" It was only \"valorised\" for male goths, who adopt a \"feminine\" appearance, including \"make-up, skirts and feminine accessories\" to \"enhance masculinity\" and facilitate traditional heterosexual courting roles.\n\nWhile goth is \"considered a music-based scene\", \"...to be Goth implies much more than shared musical tastes; it is... an \"aesthetic,\" a particular way of seeing and of being seen.\"\n\nObservers have raised the issue of to what degree individuals are truly members of the goth subculture. On one end of the spectrum is the \"Uber goth\", a person who is described as seeking a pallor so much that he or she applies \"...as much white foundation and white powder as possible.\" On the other end of the spectrum another writer terms \"poseurs\": \"goth wannabes, usually young kids going through a goth phase who do not hold to goth sensibilities but want to be part of the goth crowd...\" It has been said that a \"mall goth\" is a teen who dresses in a goth style and spends time in malls with a Hot Topic store, but who does not know much about the goth subculture or its music, thus making him or her a poseur. In one case, even a well-known performer has been labeled with the pejorative term: a \"number of goths, especially those who belonged to this subculture before the late 1980s, reject Marilyn Manson as a poseur who undermines the true meaning of goth.\"\n\nThe BBC described academic research that indicated that goths are \"refined and sensitive, keen on poetry and books, not big on drugs or anti-social behaviour.\" Teens often stay in the subculture \"into their adult life\", and they are likely to become well-educated and enter professions such as medicine or law. The subculture carries on appealing to teenagers who are looking for meaning and for identity. The scene teaches teens that there are difficult aspects to life that you \"have to make an attempt to understand\" or explain.\n\n\"The Guardian\" reported that a \"glue binding the [goth] scene together was drug use\"; however, in the scene, drug use was varied. Goth is one of the few youth movements that is not associated with a single drug, in the way that the Hippie subculture is associated with cannabis and the Mod subculture is associated with amphetamines.\n\nThe goth scene is often described as non-violent. However, two non peer-reviewed studies by the A.S.H.A. concluded a higher than average propensity toward violence, and for one of the papers, self-harm, within the goth subculture.\n\nIn the weeks following the 1999 Columbine High School massacre, media reports about the teen gunmen, Harris and Klebold, portrayed them as part of a gothic cult. An increased suspicion of goth subculture subsequently manifested in the media. This led to a moral panic over teen involvement in goth subculture and a number of other activities, such as violent video games. Harris and Klebold had initially been thought to be members of \"The Trenchcoat Mafia;\" an informal club within Columbine High School. Later, such characterizations were considered incorrect.\n\nMedia reported that the gunman in the 2006 Dawson College shooting in Montreal, Quebec, Kimveer Singh Gill, was interested in goth subculture. Gill's self-professed love of Goth culture was the topic of media interest, and it was widely reported that the word \"Goth\", in Gill's writings, was a reference to the alternative industrial and goth subculture rather than a reference to gothic rock music. Gill, who committed suicide after the attack, wrote in his online journal: \"I’m so sick of hearing about jocks and preps making life hard for the goths and others who look different, or are different.\" Gill described himself in his profile on Vampirefreaks.com as \"...Trench...the Angel of Death\" and he stated that \"Metal and Goth kick ass.\" An image gallery on Gill's Vampirefreaks.com blog had photos of him pointing a gun at the camera or wearing a long black trench coat. Mick Mercer stated that Gill was \"not a Goth. Never a Goth. The bands he listed as his chosen form of ear-bashing were relentlessly metal and standard grunge, rock and goth metal, with some industrial presence.\" Mercer stated that \"Kimveer Gill listened to metal\", \"He had nothing whatsoever to do with Goth\" and further commented \"I realise that like many Neos, Kimveer Gill may even have believed he somehow was a Goth, because they're [Neophytes] only really noted for spectacularly missing the point.\"\n\nIn part because of public misunderstanding and ignorance surrounding gothic aesthetics, people in the goth subculture sometimes suffer prejudice, discrimination, and intolerance. As is the case with members of various other subcultures and alternative lifestyles, outsiders sometimes marginalize goths, either by intention or by accident. Actress Christina Hendricks talked of being bullied as a goth in school and how difficult it was for her to deal with societal pressure: \"Kids can be pretty judgmental about people who are different. But instead of breaking down and conforming, I stood firm. That is also probably why I was unhappy. My mother was mortified and kept telling me how horrible and ugly I looked. Strangers would walk by with a look of shock on their face, so I never felt pretty. I just always felt awkward.\" Prejudice moves people into circles of bonding were they share these similar experiences and are accepted. Young goths have to define themselves and learn beauty is an aspect of cultural relativism.\n\nOn 11 August 2007, a couple walking through Stubbylee Park in Bacup, Lancashire, England were attacked by a group of teenagers because they were goths. Sophie Lancaster subsequently died from her injuries. On 29 April 2008, two teens, Ryan Herbert and Brendan Harris, were convicted for the murder of Lancaster and given life sentences; three others were given lesser sentences for the assault on her boyfriend Robert Maltby. In delivering the sentence, Judge Anthony Russell stated, \"This was a hate crime against these completely harmless people targeted because their appearance was different to yours.\" He went on to defend the goth community, calling goths \"perfectly peaceful, law-abiding people who pose no threat to anybody.\" Judge Russell added that he \"recognised it as a hate crime without Parliament having to tell him to do so and had included that view in his sentencing.\" Despite this ruling, a bill to add discrimination based on subculture affiliation to the definition of hate crime in British law was not presented to parliament.\n\nIn 2013, police in Manchester announced they would be treating attacks on members of alternative subcultures, like goths, the same as they do for attacks based on race, religion, and sexual orientation.\n\nA study published on the \"British Medical Journal\" concluded that \"identification as belonging to the Goth subculture [at some point in their lives] was the best predictor of self harm and attempted suicide [among young teens]\", and that it was most possibly due to a selection mechanism (persons that wanted to harm themselves later identified as goths, thus raising the percentage of those persons who identify as goths). According to \"The Guardian\", some goth teens are at more likely to harm themselves or attempt suicide. A medical journal study of 1,300 Scottish schoolchildren until their teen years found that the 53% of the goth teens had attempted to harm themselves and 47% had attempted suicide. The study found that the \"correlation was stronger than any other predictor.\" The study was based on a sample of 15 teenagers who identified as goths, of which 8 had self-harmed by any method, 7 had self-harmed by cutting, scratching or scoring, and 7 had attempted suicide.\n\nThe authors held that most self-harm by teens was done before joining the subculture, and that joining the subculture would actually protect them and help them deal with distress in their lives. The authors insisted on the study being based on small numbers and on the need of replication to confirm the results. The study was criticized for using only a small sample of goth teens and not taking into account other influences and differences between types of goths; by taking a study from a larger number of people.\n\n\n\n", "id": "12905", "title": "Goth subculture"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12908", "text": "Global warming potential\n\nGlobal warming potential (GWP) is a relative measure of how much heat a greenhouse gas traps in the atmosphere. It compares the amount of heat trapped by a certain mass of the gas in question to the amount of heat trapped by a similar mass of carbon dioxide. A GWP is calculated over a specific time interval, commonly 20, 100 or 500 years. GWP is expressed as a factor of carbon dioxide (whose GWP is standardized to 1). In the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, methane has a lifetime of 12.4 years and with climate-carbon feedbacks a global warming potential of 86 over 20 years and 34 over 100 years in response to emissions. User related choices such as the time horizon can greatly affect the numerical values obtained for carbon dioxide equivalents. For a change in time horizon from 20 to 100 years, the GWP for methane decreases by a factor of approximately 3.\nThe substances subject to restrictions under the Kyoto protocol either are rapidly increasing their concentrations in Earth's atmosphere or have a large GWP.\n\nThe GWP depends on the following factors:\nThus, a high GWP correlates with a large infrared absorption and a long atmospheric lifetime. The dependence of GWP on the wavelength of absorption is more complicated. Even if a gas absorbs radiation efficiently at a certain wavelength, this may not affect its GWP much if the atmosphere already absorbs most radiation at that wavelength. A gas has the most effect if it absorbs in a \"window\" of wavelengths where the atmosphere is fairly transparent. The dependence of GWP as a function of wavelength has been found empirically and published as a graph.\n\nBecause the GWP of a greenhouse gas depends directly on its infrared spectrum, the use of infrared spectroscopy to study greenhouse gases is centrally important in the effort to understand the impact of human activities on global climate change.\n\nJust as radiative forcing provides a simplified means of comparing the various factors that are believed to influence the climate system to one another, global warming potentials (GWPs) are one type of simplified index based upon radiative properties that can be used to estimate the potential future impacts of emissions of different gases upon the climate system in a relative sense. GWP is based on a number of factors, including the radiative efficiency (infrared-absorbing ability) of each gas relative to that of carbon dioxide, as well as the decay rate of each gas (the amount removed from the atmosphere over a given number of years) relative to that of carbon dioxide.\n\nThe radiative forcing capacity (RF) is the amount of energy per unit area, per unit time, absorbed by the greenhouse gas, that would otherwise be lost to space. It can be expressed by the formula:\n\nwhere the subscript \"i\" represents an interval of 10 inverse centimeters. Abs represents the integrated infrared absorbance of the sample in that interval, and F represents the RF for that interval.\n\nThe Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) provides the generally accepted values for GWP, which changed slightly between 1996 and 2001. An exact definition of how GWP is calculated is to be found in the IPCC's 2001 Third Assessment Report. The GWP is defined as the ratio of the time-integrated radiative forcing from the instantaneous release of 1 kg of a trace substance relative to that of 1 kg of a reference gas:\n\nwhere TH is the time horizon over which the calculation is considered; a is the radiative efficiency due to a unit increase in atmospheric abundance of the substance (i.e., Wm kg) and [x(t)] is the time-dependent decay in abundance of the substance following an instantaneous release of it at time t=0. The denominator contains the corresponding quantities for the reference gas (i.e. ). The radiative efficiencies a and a are not necessarily constant over time. While the absorption of infrared radiation by many greenhouse gases varies linearly with their abundance, a few important ones display non-linear behaviour for current and likely future abundances (e.g., CO, CH, and NO). For those gases, the relative radiative forcing will depend upon abundance and hence upon the future scenario adopted.\n\nSince all GWP calculations are a comparison to CO which is non-linear, all GWP values are affected. Assuming otherwise as is done above will lead to lower GWPs for other gases than a more detailed approach would. Clarifying this, while increasing CO has less and less effect on radiative absorption as ppm concentrations rise, more powerful greenhouse gases like methane and nitrous oxide have different thermal absorption frequencies to CO that are not filled up (saturated) as much as CO, so rising ppms of these gases are far more significant.\n\nUnder the Kyoto Protocol, the Conference of the Parties decided (decision 2/CP.3) that the values of GWP calculated for the IPCC Second Assessment Report are to be used for converting the various greenhouse gas emissions into comparable CO equivalents when computing overall sources and sinks.\n\nThe \"Global Temperature change Potential\" is another way to quantify the ratio change from a substance relative to that of CO, in global mean surface temperature, used for a specific time span.\n\nNote that a substance's GWP depends on the timespan over which the potential is calculated. A gas which is quickly removed from the atmosphere may initially have a large effect but for longer time periods as it has been removed becomes less important. Thus methane has a potential of 34 over 100 years but 86 over 20 years; conversely sulfur hexafluoride has a GWP of 22,800 over 100 years but 16,300 over 20 years (IPCC Third Assessment Report). The GWP value depends on how the gas concentration decays over time in the atmosphere. This is often not precisely known and hence the values should not be considered exact. For this reason when quoting a GWP it is important to give a reference to the calculation.\n\nThe GWP for a mixture of gases can be obtained from the mass-fraction-weighted average of the GWPs of the individual gases.\n\nCommonly, a time horizon of 100 years is used by regulators (e.g., the California Air Resources Board).\n\nCarbon dioxide has a GWP of exactly 1 (since it is the baseline unit to which all other greenhouse gases are compared).\n\nThe values given in the table assume the same mass of compound is released; different ratios will result from the conversion of one substance to another. For instance, burning methane to carbon dioxide would reduce the global warming impact, but by a smaller factor than 25:1 because the mass of methane burned is less than the mass of carbon dioxide released (ratio 1:2.74). If you started with 1 tonne of methane which has a GWP of 25, after combustion you would have 2.74 tonnes of CO, each tonne of which has a GWP of 1. This is a net reduction of 22.26 tonnes of GWP, reducing the global warming effect by a ratio of 25:2.74 (approximately 9 times).\n\nThe global warming potential of perfluorotributylamine (PFTBA) over a 100-year time horizon has been estimated to be approximately 7100. It has been used by the electrical industry since the mid-20th century for electronic testing and as a heat transfer agent. PFTBA has the highest radiative efficiency (relative effectiveness of greenhouse gases to restrict long-wave radiation from escaping back into space) of any molecule detected in the atmosphere to date. The researchers found an average of 0.18 parts per trillion of PFTBA in Toronto air samples, whereas carbon dioxide exists around 400 parts per million.\n\nWater vapour has a profound infrared absorption spectrum with more and broader absorption bands than CO, and also absorbs non-zero amounts of radiation in its low absorbing spectral regions, (see greenhouse gas (GHG)), its GWP is therefore difficult to calculate. Further, its concentration in the atmosphere depends on air temperature and water availability; using a global average temperature of ~16 °C, for example, creates an average humidity of ~18,000ppm at sea level (CO is ~400ppm and so concentrations of [HO]/[CO] ~ 45x). Another issue with calculating GWP is that, unlike other GHG, water vapor does not decay in the environment, so an average over some time period or some other measure consistent with \"time dependent decay,\" q.v., above, must be used in lieu of the time dependent decay of artificial or excess CO, molecules. Other factors complicating its calculation are the Earth's temperature distribution, and the differing land masses in the Northern and Southern hemispheres.\n\n\n", "id": "12908", "title": "Global warming potential"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12910", "text": "Grothendieck topology\n\nIn category theory, a branch of mathematics, a Grothendieck topology is a structure on a category \"C\" which makes the objects of \"C\" act like the open sets of a topological space. A category together with a choice of Grothendieck topology is called a site.\n\nGrothendieck topologies axiomatize the notion of an open cover. Using the notion of covering provided by a Grothendieck topology, it becomes possible to define sheaves on a category and their cohomology. This was first done in algebraic geometry and algebraic number theory by Alexander Grothendieck to define the étale cohomology of a scheme. It has been used to define other cohomology theories since then, such as l-adic cohomology, flat cohomology, and crystalline cohomology. While Grothendieck topologies are most often used to define cohomology theories, they have found other applications as well, such as to John Tate's theory of rigid analytic geometry.\n\nThere is a natural way to associate a site to an ordinary topological space, and Grothendieck's theory is loosely regarded as a generalization of classical topology. Under meager point-set hypotheses, namely sobriety, this is completely accurate—it is possible to recover a sober space from its associated site. However simple examples such as the indiscrete topological space show that not all topological spaces can be expressed using Grothendieck topologies. Conversely, there are Grothendieck topologies which do not come from topological spaces.\n\nThe term \"Grothendieck topology\" has changed in meaning. In it meant what is now called a Grothendieck pretopology, and some authors still use this old meaning. modified the definition to use sieves rather than covers. Much of the time this does not make much difference, as each Grothendieck pretopology determines a unique Grothendieck topology, though quite different pretopologies can give the same topology.\n\nAndré Weil's famous Weil conjectures proposed that certain properties of equations with integral coefficients should be understood as geometric properties of the algebraic variety that they define. His conjectures postulated that there should be a cohomology theory of algebraic varieties which gave number-theoretic information about their defining equations. This cohomology theory was known as the \"Weil cohomology\", but using the tools he had available, Weil was unable to construct it.\n\nIn the early 1960s, Alexander Grothendieck introduced étale maps into algebraic geometry as algebraic analogues of local analytic isomorphisms in analytic geometry. He used étale coverings to define an algebraic analogue of the fundamental group of a topological space. Soon Jean-Pierre Serre noticed that some properties of étale coverings mimicked those of open immersions, and that consequently it was possible to make constructions which imitated the cohomology functor \"H\". Grothendieck saw that it would be possible to use Serre's idea to define a cohomology theory which he suspected would be the Weil cohomology. To define this cohomology theory, Grothendieck needed to replace the usual, topological notion of an open covering with one that would use étale coverings instead. Grothendieck also saw how to phrase the definition of covering abstractly; this is where the definition of a Grothendieck topology comes from.\n\nThe classical definition of a sheaf begins with a topological space \"X\". A sheaf associates information to the open sets of \"X\". This information can be phrased abstractly by letting \"O\"(\"X\") be the category whose objects are the open subsets \"U\" of \"X\" and whose morphisms are the inclusion maps \"V\" → \"U\" of open sets \"U\" and \"V\" of \"X\". We will call such maps \"open immersions\", just as in the context of schemes. Then a presheaf on \"X\" is a contravariant functor from \"O\"(\"X\") to the category of sets, and a sheaf is a presheaf which satisfies the gluing axiom. The gluing axiom is phrased in terms of pointwise covering, i.e., {\"U\"} covers \"U\" if and only if formula_1 \"U\" = \"U\". In this definition, \"U\" is an open subset of \"X\". Grothendieck topologies replace each \"U\" with an entire family of open subsets; in this example, \"U\" is replaced by the family of all open immersions \"V\" → \"U\". Such a collection is called a \"sieve\". Pointwise covering is replaced by the notion of a \"covering family\"; in the above example, the set of all {\"V\" → \"U\"} as \"i\" varies is a covering family of \"U\". Sieves and covering families can be axiomatized, and once this is done open sets and pointwise covering can be replaced by other notions which describe other properties of the space \"X\".\n\nIn a Grothendieck topology, the notion of a collection of open subsets of \"U\" stable under inclusion is replaced by the notion of a sieve. If \"c\" is any given object in \"C\", a sieve on \"c\" is a subfunctor of the functor Hom(−, \"c\"); (this is the Yoneda embedding applied to \"c\"). In the case of \"O\"(\"X\"), a sieve \"S\" on an open set \"U\" selects a collection of open subsets of \"U\" which is stable under inclusion. More precisely, consider that for any open subset \"V\" of \"U\", \"S\"(\"V\") will be a subset of Hom(\"V\", \"U\"), which has only one element, the open immersion \"V\" → \"U\". Then \"V\" will be considered \"selected\" by \"S\" if and only if \"S\"(\"V\") is nonempty. If \"W\" is a subset of \"V\", then there is a morphism \"S\"(\"V\") → \"S\"(\"W\") given by composition with the inclusion \"W\" → \"V\". If \"S\"(\"V\") is non-empty, it follows that \"S\"(\"W\") is also non-empty.\n\nIf \"S\" is a sieve on \"X\", and \"f\": \"Y\" → \"X\" is a morphism, then left composition by \"f\" gives a sieve on \"Y\" called the pullback of \"S\" along \"f\", denoted by \"f\"\"S\". It is defined as the fibered product \"S\" × Hom(−, \"Y\") together with its natural embedding in Hom(−, \"Y\"). More concretely, for each object \"Z\" of \"C\", \"f\"\"S\"(\"Z\") = { \"g\": \"Z\" → \"Y\" | \"fg\" formula_2\"S\"(\"Z\") }, and \"f\"\"S\" inherits its action on morphisms by being a subfunctor of Hom(−, \"Y\"). In the classical example, the pullback of a collection {\"V\"} of subsets of \"U\" along an inclusion \"W\" → \"U\" is the collection {\"V\"∩W}.\n\nA Grothendieck topology \"J\" on a category \"C\" is a collection, \"for each object c of C\", of distinguished sieves on \"c\", denoted by \"J\"(\"c\") and called covering sieves of \"c\". This selection will be subject to certain axioms, stated below. Continuing the previous example, a sieve \"S\" on an open set \"U\" in \"O\"(\"X\") will be a covering sieve if and only if the union of all the open sets \"V\" for which \"S\"(\"V\") is nonempty equals \"U\"; in other words, if and only if \"S\" gives us a collection of open sets which cover \"U\" in the classical sense.\n\nThe conditions we impose on a Grothendieck topology are:\n\n\nThe base change axiom corresponds to the idea that if {formula_3} covers \"U\", then {\"U\" ∩ \"V\"} should cover \"U\" ∩ \"V\". The local character axiom corresponds to the idea that if {\"U\"} covers \"U\" and {\"V\"} covers \"U\" for each \"i\", then the collection {\"V\"} for all \"i\" and \"j\" should cover \"U\". Lastly, the identity axiom corresponds to the idea that any set is covered by all its possible subsets.\n\nIn fact, it is possible to put these axioms in another form where their geometric character is more apparent, assuming that the underlying category \"C\" contains certain fibered products. In this case, instead of specifying sieves, we can specify that certain collections of maps with a common codomain should cover their codomain. These collections are called covering families. If the collection of all covering families satisfies certain axioms, then we say that they form a Grothendieck pretopology. These axioms are:\n\n\nFor any pretopology, the collection of all sieves that contain a covering family from the pretopology is always a Grothendieck topology.\n\nFor categories with fibered products, there is a converse. Given a collection of arrows {\"X\" → \"X\"}, we construct a sieve \"S\" by letting \"S\"(\"Y\") be the set of all morphisms \"Y\" → \"X\" that factor through some arrow \"X\" → \"X\". This is called the sieve generated by {\"X\" → \"X\"}. Now choose a topology. Say that {\"X\" → \"X\"} is a covering family if and only if the sieve that it generates is a covering sieve for the given topology. It is easy to check that this defines a pretopology.\n\n(PT 3) is sometimes replaced by a weaker axiom:\n\n\n(PT 3) implies (PT 3'), but not conversely. However, suppose that we have a collection of covering families that satisfies (PT 0) through (PT 2) and (PT 3'), but not (PT 3). These families generate a pretopology. The topology generated by the original collection of covering families is then the same as the topology generated by the pretopology, because the sieve generated by an isomorphism \"Y\" → \"X\" is Hom(−, \"X\"). Consequently, if we restrict our attention to topologies, (PT 3) and (PT 3') are equivalent.\n\nLet \"C\" be a category and let \"J\" be a Grothendieck topology on \"C\". The pair (\"C\", \"J\") is called a site.\n\nA presheaf on a category is a contravariant functor from \"C\" to the category of all sets. Note that for this definition \"C\" is not required to have a topology. A sheaf on a site, however, should allow gluing, just like sheaves in classical topology. Consequently, we define a sheaf on a site to be a presheaf \"F\" such that for all objects \"X\" and all covering sieves \"S\" on \"X\", the natural map Hom(Hom(−, \"X\"), \"F\") → Hom(\"S\", \"F\"), induced by the inclusion of \"S\" into Hom(−, \"X\"), is a bijection. Halfway in between a presheaf and a sheaf is the notion of a separated presheaf, where the natural map above is required to be only an injection, not a bijection, for all sieves \"S\". A morphism of presheaves or of sheaves is a natural transformation of functors. The category of all sheaves on \"C\" is the topos defined by the site (\"C\", \"J\").\n\nUsing the Yoneda lemma, it is possible to show that a presheaf on the category \"O\"(\"X\") is a sheaf on the topology defined above if and only if it is a sheaf in the classical sense.\n\nSheaves on a pretopology have a particularly simple description: For each covering family {\"X\" → \"X\"}, the diagram\n\nmust be an equalizer. For a separated presheaf, the first arrow need only be injective.\n\nSimilarly, one can define presheaves and sheaves of abelian groups, rings, modules, and so on. One can require either that a presheaf \"F\" is a contravariant functor to the category of abelian groups (or rings, or modules, etc.), or that \"F\" be an abelian group (ring, module, etc.) object in the category of all contravariant functors from \"C\" to the category of sets. These two definitions are equivalent.\n\nLet C be any category. To define the discrete topology, we declare all sieves to be covering sieves. If C has all fibered products, this is equivalent to declaring all families to be covering families. To define the indiscrete topology, we declare only the sieves of the form Hom(−, \"X\") to be covering sieves. The indiscrete topology is also known as the biggest or chaotic topology, and it is generated by the pretopology which has only isomorphisms for covering families. A sheaf on the indiscrete site is the same thing as a presheaf.\n\nLet C be any category. The Yoneda embedding gives a functor Hom(−, \"X\") for each object \"X\" of C. The canonical topology is the biggest (finest) topology such that every representable presheaf, i.e. presheaf of the form Hom(−, \"X\"), is a sheaf. A covering sieve or covering family for this site is said to be \"strictly universally epimorphic\". A topology which is less fine than the canonical topology, that is, for which every covering sieve is strictly universally epimorphic, is called subcanonical. Subcanonical sites are exactly the sites for which every presheaf of the form Hom(−, \"X\") is a sheaf. Most sites encountered in practice are subcanonical.\n\nWe repeat the example which we began with above. Let \"X\" be a topological space. We defined \"O\"(\"X\") to be the category whose objects are the open sets of \"X\" and whose morphisms are inclusions of open sets. Note that for an open set \"U\" and a sieve \"S\" on \"U\", the set \"S\"(\"V\") contains either zero or one element for every open set \"V\". The covering sieves on an object \"U\" of \"O\"(\"X\") are those sieves \"S\" satisfying the following condition:\nThis notion of cover matches the usual notion in point-set topology. \n\nThis topology can also naturally be expressed as a pretopology. We say that a family of inclusions {\"V\" formula_5 \"U\"} is a covering family if and only if the union formula_6\"V\" equals \"U\". This site is called the \"'small site associated to a topological space \"X\".\n\nLet \"Spc\" be the category of all topological spaces. Given any family of functions {\"u\" : \"V\" → \"X\"}, we say that it is a surjective family or that the morphisms \"u\" are jointly surjective if formula_6 \"u\"(\"V\") equals \"X\". We define a pretopology on \"Spc\" by taking the covering families to be surjective families all of whose members are open immersions. Let \"S\" be a sieve on \"Spc\". \"S\" is a covering sieve for this topology if and only if:\n\nFix a topological space \"X\". Consider the comma category \"Spc/X\" of topological spaces with a fixed continuous map to \"X\". The topology on \"Spc\" induces a topology on \"Spc/X\". The covering sieves and covering families are almost exactly the same; the only difference is that now all the maps involved commute with the fixed maps to \"X\". This is the big site associated to a topological space X . Notice that \"Spc\" is the big site associated to the one point space. This site was first considered by Jean Giraud.\n\nLet \"M\" be a manifold. \"M\" has a category of open sets \"O\"(\"M\") because it is a topological space, and it gets a topology as in the above example. For two open sets \"U\" and \"V\" of \"M\", the fiber product \"U\" × \"V\" is the open set \"U\" ∩ \"V\", which is still in \"O\"(\"M\"). This means that the topology on \"O\"(\"M\") is defined by a pretopology, the same pretopology as before.\n\nLet \"Mfd\" be the category of all manifolds and continuous maps. (Or smooth manifolds and smooth maps, or real analytic manifolds and analytic maps, etc.) \"Mfd\" is a subcategory of \"Spc\", and open immersions are continuous (or smooth, or analytic, etc.), so \"Mfd\" inherits a topology from \"Spc\". This lets us construct the big site of the manifold \"M\" as the site \"Mfd/M\". We can also define this topology using the same pretopology we used above. Notice that to satisfy (PT 0), we need to check that for any continuous map of manifolds \"X\" → \"Y\" and any open subset \"U\" of \"Y\", the fibered product \"U\" × \"X\" is in \"Mfd/M\". This is just the statement that the preimage of an open set is open. Notice, however, that not all fibered products exist in \"Mfd\" because the preimage of a smooth map at a critical value need not be a manifold.\n\nThe category of schemes, denoted \"Sch\", has a tremendous number of useful topologies. A complete understanding of some questions may require examining a scheme using several different topologies. All of these topologies have associated small and big sites. The big site is formed by taking the entire category of schemes and their morphisms, together with the covering sieves specified by the topology. The small site over a given scheme is formed by only taking the objects and morphisms which are part of a cover of the given scheme.\n\nThe most elementary of these is the Zariski topology. Let \"X\" be a scheme. \"X\" has an underlying topological space, and this topological space determines a Grothendieck topology. The Zariski topology on \"Sch\" is generated by the pretopology whose covering families are jointly surjective families of scheme-theoretic open immersions. The covering sieves \"S\" for \"Zar\" are characterized by the following two properties:\nDespite their outward similarities, the topology on \"Zar\" is \"not\" the restriction of the topology on \"Spc\"! This is because there are morphisms of schemes which are topologically open immersions but which are not scheme-theoretic open immersions. For example, let \"A\" be a non-reduced ring and let \"N\" be its ideal of nilpotents. The quotient map \"A\" → \"A/N\" induces a map Spec \"A/N\" → Spec \"A\" which is the identity on underlying topological spaces. To be a scheme-theoretic open immersion it must also induce an isomorphism on structure sheaves, which this map does not do. In fact, this map is a closed immersion.\n\nThe étale topology is finer than the Zariski topology. It was the first Grothendieck topology to be closely studied. Its covering families are jointly surjective families of étale morphisms. It is finer than the Nisnevich topology, but neither finer nor coarser than the \"cdh\" and l′ topologies.\n\nThere are two flat topologies, the \"fppf\" topology and the \"fpqc\" topology. \"fppf\" stands for ', and in this topology, a morphism of affine schemes is a covering morphism if it is faithfully flat, of finite presentation, and is quasi-finite. \"fpqc\" stands for ', and in this topology, a morphism of affine schemes is a covering morphism if it is faithfully flat. In both categories, a covering family is defined be a family which is a cover on Zariski open subsets. In the fpqc topology, any faithfully flat and quasi-compact morphism is a cover. These topologies are closely related to descent. The \"fpqc\" topology is finer than all the topologies mentioned above, and it is very close to the canonical topology.\n\nGrothendieck introduced crystalline cohomology to study the \"p\"-torsion part of the cohomology of characteristic \"p\" varieties. In the \"crystalline topology\" which is the basis of this theory, covering maps are given by infinitesimal thickenings together with divided power structures. The crystalline covers of a fixed scheme form a category with no final object.\n\nThere are two natural types of functors between sites. They are given by functors which are compatible with the topology in a certain sense.\n\nIf (\"C\", \"J\") and (\"D\", \"K\") are sites and \"u\" : \"C\" → \"D\" is a functor, then \"u\" is continuous if for every sheaf \"F\" on \"D\" with respect to the topology \"K\", the presheaf \"Fu\" is a sheaf with respect to the topology \"J\". Continuous functors induce functors between the corresponding topoi by sending a sheaf \"F\" to \"Fu\". These functors are called pushforwards. If formula_8 and formula_9 denote the topoi associated to \"C\" and \"D\", then the pushforward functor is formula_10.\n\n\"u\" admits a left adjoint \"u\" called the pullback. \"u\" need not preserve limits, even finite limits.\n\nIn the same way, \"u\" sends a sieve on an object \"X\" of \"C\" to a sieve on the object \"uX\" of \"D\". A continuous functor sends covering sieves to covering sieves. If \"J\" is the topology defined by a pretopology, and if \"u\" commutes with fibered products, then \"u\" is continuous if and only if it sends covering sieves to covering sieves and if and only if it sends covering families to covering families. In general, it is \"not\" sufficient for \"u\" to send covering sieves to covering sieves (see SGA IV 3, 1.9.3).\n\nAgain, let (\"C\", \"J\") and (\"D\", \"K\") be sites and \"v\" : \"C\" → \"D\" be a functor. If \"X\" is an object of \"C\" and \"R\" is a sieve on \"vX\", then \"R\" can be pulled back to a sieve \"S\" as follows: A morphism \"f\" : \"Z\" → \"X\" is in \"S\" if and only if \"v\"(\"f\") : \"vZ\" → \"vX\" is in \"R\". This defines a sieve. \"v\" is cocontinuous if and only if for every object \"X\" of \"C\" and every covering sieve \"R\" of \"vX\", the pullback \"S\" of \"R\" is a covering sieve on \"X\".\n\nComposition with \"v\" sends a presheaf \"F\" on \"D\" to a presheaf \"Fv\" on \"C\", but if \"v\" is cocontinuous, this need not send sheaves to sheaves. However, this functor on presheaf categories, usually denoted formula_11, admits a right adjoint formula_12. Then \"v\" is cocontinuous if and only if formula_12 sends sheaves to sheaves, that is, if and only if it restricts to a functor formula_14. In this case, the composite of formula_11 with the associated sheaf functor is a left adjoint of \"v\" denoted \"v\". Furthermore, \"v\" preserves finite limits, so the adjoint functors \"v\" and \"v\" determine a geometric morphism of topoi formula_16.\n\nA continuous functor \"u\" : \"C\" → \"D\" is a morphism of sites \"D\" → \"C\" (\"not\" \"C\" → \"D\") if \"u\" preserves finite limits. In this case, \"u\" and \"u\" determine a geometric morphism of topoi formula_16. The reasoning behind the convention that a continuous functor \"C\" → \"D\" is said to determine a morphism of sites in the opposite direction is that this agrees with the intuition coming from the case of topological spaces. A continuous map of topological spaces \"X\" → \"Y\" determines a continuous functor \"O\"(\"Y\") → \"O\"(\"X\"). Since the original map on topological spaces is said to send \"X\" to \"Y\", the morphism of sites is said to as well.\n\nA particular case of this happens when a continuous functor admits a left adjoint. Suppose that \"u\" : \"C\" → \"D\" and \"v\" : \"D\" → \"C\" are functors with \"u\" right adjoint to \"v\". Then \"u\" is continuous if and only if \"v\" is cocontinuous, and when this happens, \"u\" is naturally isomorphic to \"v\" and \"u\" is naturally isomorphic to \"v\". In particular, \"u\" is a morphism of sites.\n\n\n\n", "id": "12910", "title": "Grothendieck topology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12913", "text": "Greens\n\nGreens may refer to:\n\n\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "12913", "title": "Greens"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12914", "text": "Ghost in the Shell\n\nAnimation studio Production I.G has produced several different anime adaptations of \"Ghost in the Shell\", starting with the 1995 film of the same name, telling the story of Section 9's investigation of the Puppet Master. The television series \"\" followed in 2002, telling an alternate story from the manga and first film, featuring Section 9's investigations of government corruption in the Laughing Man and Individual Eleven incidents. The year 2013 saw the start of the \"\" original video animation (OVA) series, consisting of four episodes through mid-2014. The series was recompiled in early 2015 as a television series titled \"Ghost in the Shell: Arise - Alternative Architecture\", airing with an additional two episodes. An animated feature film produced by most of the \"Arise\" staff, titled \"\" was released on June 20, 2015. A live action film of the same name is scheduled for release on March 31, 2017.\n\nShirow has stated that he had always wanted the title of his manga to be \"GHOST IN THE SHELL\", even in Japan, but his original publishers preferred . He had chosen \"Ghost in the Shell\" in homage to Arthur Koestler's \"The Ghost in the Machine\", from which he also drew inspiration.\n\nPrimarily set in the mid-twenty-first century in the fictional Japanese city of , otherwise known as , the manga and the many anime adaptations follow the members of Public Security Section 9, a special-operations task-force made up of former military officers and police detectives. Political intrigue and counter-terrorism operations are standard fare for Section 9, but the various actions of corrupt officials, companies, and cyber-criminals in each scenario are unique and require the diverse skills of Section 9's staff to prevent a series of incidents from escalating.\nIn this post-cyberpunk iteration of a possible future, computer technology has advanced to the point that many members of the public possess cyberbrains, technology that allows them to interface their biological brain with various networks. The level of cyberization varies from simple minimal interfaces to almost complete replacement of the brain with cybernetic parts, in cases of severe trauma. This can also be combined with various levels of prostheses, with a fully prosthetic body enabling a person to become a cyborg. The main character of \"Ghost in the Shell\", Major Motoko Kusanagi, is such a cyborg, having had a terrible accident befall her as a child that ultimately required her to use a full-body prosthesis to house her cyberbrain. This high level of cyberization, however, opens the brain up to attacks from highly skilled hackers, with the most dangerous being those who will hack a person to bend to their whims.\n\nThe original \"Ghost in the Shell\" manga ran in Japan from April 1989 to November 1990 in Kodansha's manga anthology \"Young Magazine\", and was released in a \"tankōbon\" volume on October 5, 1991. \"Ghost in the Shell 2: Man-Machine Interface\" followed 1997 for 9 issues in \"Young Magazine\", and was collected in the \"Ghost in the Shell: Solid Box\" on December 1, 2000. Four stories from \"Man-Machine Interface\" that were not released in tankobon format from previous releases were later collected in \"Ghost in the Shell 1.5: Human-Error Processor\", and was published by Kodansha on July 23, 2003. Several art books have also been published for the manga.\n\nTwo animated films based on the original manga have been released, both directed by Mamoru Oshii and animated by Production I.G. \"Ghost in the Shell\" was released in 1995 and follows the \"Puppet Master\" storyline from the manga. It was re-released in 2008 as \"Ghost in the Shell 2.0\" with new audio and updated 3D computer graphics in certain scenes. \"Innocence\", otherwise known as \"\", was released in 2004, with its story based on a chapter from the first manga.\n\nOn September 5, 2014, it was revealed by Production I.G. that a new \"Ghost in the Shell\" animated film, in Japanese, would be released in 2015 promising to show the \"further evolution [of the series]\". On January 8, 2015, a short teaser trailer was revealed for the project unveiling a redesigned Major more closely resembling her appearance from the older films. The trailer listed Kazuya Nomura as the director, Kazuchika Kise as the general director and character designer, Toru Okubo as the animation director, Tow Ubukata as the screenplay writer and Cornelius as the composer. The film premiered on June 20, 2015, in Japanese theaters, and follows the Arise continuity of the franchise.\n\nIn 2008, DreamWorks and Steven Spielberg acquired the rights to produce a live-action film adaptation of the original manga. Avi Arad and Steven Paul were later confirmed as producers, with Jamie Moss to write the screenplay. In October, 2009, it was announced that Laeta Kalogridis had replaced Moss as writer. On January 24, 2014, it was reported that Rupert Sanders will direct the film, with a screenplay by William Wheeler. On September 3, 2014, Margot Robbie was in early talks for the lead role, but by October 16, 2014, the lead role was instead offered to Scarlett Johansson. On January 5, 2015, \"Variety\" confirmed that Johansson would star in the film. Paramount Pictures will co-produce and co-finance the film and handle overseas distribution. The film is scheduled to start production in early 2016 for a March 31, 2017, release date by Touchstone Pictures. But in September 2015, it was reported that DreamWorks and Disney would not renew their distribution deal, set to expire in August 2016, with \"The BFG\" being the last film to be released under the original agreement. Due to this, Universal Studios will handle the domestic distribution for the film. On October 23, 2015, Jonathan Herman was hired to write the script. On November 10, 2015, Variety reports that Pilou Asbaek was cast as Batou. On November 19, 2015, Deadline reported that Sam Riley was in talks for the role of the film's villain The Laughing Man, but on February 4, 2016, \"Variety\" reported that Michael Pitt was in talks for the role.\n\nIn 2002, \"Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex\" premiered on Animax, presenting a new telling of \"Ghost in the Shell\" independent from the original manga, focusing on Section 9's investigation of the Laughing Man hacker. It was followed in 2004 by a second season titled \"Ghost in the Shell: S.A.C. 2nd GIG\", which focused on the Individual Eleven terrorist group. The primary storylines of both seasons were compressed into OVAs broadcast as \"Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex The Laughing Man\" in 2005 and \"Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex Individual Eleven\" in 2006. Also in 2006, \"\", featuring Section 9's confrontation with a hacker known as the Puppeteer, was broadcast, serving as a finale to the anime series. for the series and its films was composed by Yoko Kanno.\n\nIn addition to the anime, a series of published books, two separate manga adaptations, and several video games for consoles and mobile phones have been released for \"Stand Alone Complex\".\n\nIn 2013, a new iteration of the series titled \"\" premiered, tackling an original look at the \"Ghost in the Shell\" world, set before the original manga. It was released as a series of four original video animation (OVA) episodes (with limited theatrical releases) from 2013 to 2014, then recompiled as a 10-episode television series under the title of \"Kōkaku Kidōtai: Arise - Alternative Architecture\". An additional fifth OVA titled \"Pyrophoric Cult\", originally premiering in the \"Alternative Architecture\" broadcast as two original episodes, will be combined and released on August 26, 2015. Kazuchika Kise served as the chief director of the series, with Tow Ubukata as head writer. Cornelius was brought onto the project to compose the score for the series, with the Major's new voice actress Maaya Sakamoto also providing vocals for certain tracks.\n\nA manga adaptation was serialized in Kodansha's \"Young Magazine\", which started on March 13 and ended on August 26, 2013.\n\n\"Ghost in the Shell\" was developed by Exact and released for the PlayStation on July 17, 1997, in Japan by Sony Computer Entertainment. It is a third-person shooter featuring an original storyline where the character plays a rookie member of Section 9. The video game's soundtrack \"Megatech Body\" features various electronica artists.\n\nSeveral video games were also developed to tie into the \"Stand Alone Complex\" television series, in addition to a first-person shooter by Nexon and Neople titled \"\", released in 2016.\n\n\n", "id": "12914", "title": "Ghost in the Shell"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12916", "text": "Gauss–Legendre algorithm\n\nThe Gauss–Legendre algorithm is an algorithm to compute the digits of π. It is notable for being rapidly convergent, with only 25 iterations producing 45 million correct digits of π. However, the drawback is that it is computer memory-intensive and therefore sometimes Machin-like formulas are used instead.\n\nThe method is based on the individual work of Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855) and Adrien-Marie Legendre (1752–1833) combined with modern algorithms for multiplication and square roots. It repeatedly replaces two numbers by their arithmetic and geometric mean, in order to approximate their arithmetic-geometric mean.\n\nThe version presented below is also known as the Gauss–Euler, Brent–Salamin (or Salamin–Brent) algorithm; it was independently discovered in 1975 by Richard Brent and Eugene Salamin. It was used to compute the first 206,158,430,000 decimal digits of π on September 18 to 20, 1999, and the results were checked with Borwein's algorithm.\n\n\nThe first three iterations give (approximations given up to and including the first incorrect digit):\n\nThe algorithm has quadratic convergence, which essentially means that the number of correct digits doubles with each iteration of the algorithm.\n\nThe arithmetic–geometric mean of two numbers, a and b, is found by calculating the limit of the sequences\n\nwhich both converge to the same limit.\nIf formula_10 and formula_11 then the limit is formula_12 where formula_13 is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind\n\nIf formula_15, formula_16. then\n\nwhere formula_18 is the complete elliptic integral of the second kind:\n\nGauss knew of both of these results.\n\nFor formula_20 and formula_21 such that formula_22 Legendre proved the identity:\n\nThe values formula_24 can be substituted into Legendre’s identity and the approximations to K, E can be found by terms in the sequences for the arithmetic geometric mean with formula_10 and formula_26.\n\n", "id": "12916", "title": "Gauss–Legendre algorithm"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12917", "text": "Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search\n\nThe Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search (GIMPS) is a collaborative project of volunteers who use freely available software to search for Mersenne prime numbers.\n\nThe GIMPS project was founded by George Woltman, who also wrote the software Prime95 and MPrime for the project. Scott Kurowski wrote the PrimeNet Internet server that supports the research to demonstrate Entropia-distributed computing software, a company he founded in 1997. GIMPS is registered as Mersenne Research, Inc. Kurowski is Executive Vice President and board director of Mersenne Research Inc. GIMPS is said to be one of the first large scale distributed computing projects over the Internet for research purposes.\n\nThe project has found a total of fifteen Mersenne primes , thirteen of which were the largest known prime number at their respective times of discovery. The largest known prime is 2 − 1 (or M in short). This prime was discovered on September 17, 2015 by Curtis Cooper at the University of Central Missouri.\n\nTo perform its testing, the project relies primarily on Lucas–Lehmer primality test, an algorithm that is both specialized to testing Mersenne primes and particularly efficient on binary computer architectures. They also have a trial division phase, used to rapidly eliminate Mersenne numbers with small factors which make up a large proportion of candidates. Pollard's p - 1 algorithm is also used to search for larger factors.\n\nThe project began in early January 1996, with a program that ran on i386 computers.\nThe name for the project was coined by Luther Welsh, one of its earlier searchers and the discoverer of the 29th Mersenne prime.\nWithin a few months, several dozen people had joined, and over a thousand by the end of the first year.\nJoel Armengaud, a participant, discovered the primality of M on November 13, 1996.\n\n, GIMPS has a sustained aggregate throughput of approximately 137.023 TFLOP/s. In November 2012, GIMPS maintained 95 TFLOP/s, theoretically earning the GIMPS virtual computer a place among the TOP500 most powerful known computer systems in the world. Also theoretically, in November 2012, the GIMPS held a rank of 330 in the TOP500. The preceding place was then held by an 'HP Cluster Platform 3000 BL460c G7' of Hewlett-Packard. As of November 2014 TOP500 results, these old GIMPS numbers would no longer make the list.\n\nPreviously, this was approximately 50 TFLOP/s in early 2010, 30 TFLOP/s in mid-2008, 20 TFLOP/s in mid-2006, and 14 TFLOP/s in early 2004.\n\nAlthough the GIMPS software's source code is publicly available, technically it is not free software, since it has a restriction that users must abide by the project's distribution terms\nif the software is used to discover a prime number with at least 100 million decimal digits and wins the $150,000 USD bounty offered by the Electronic Frontier Foundation, and a bounty of $250,000 USD for a prime number with at least 1 billion decimal digits.\n\nThird-party programs for testing Mersenne numbers, such as Mlucas and Glucas (for non-x86 systems), do not have this restriction.\n\nAlso, GIMPS \"reserves the right to change this EULA without notice and with reasonable retroactive effect\".\"\"\n\nAll Mersenne primes are in the form M, where \"q\" is the (prime) exponent. The prime number itself is so the smallest prime number in this table is \n\nM is the rank of the Mersenne prime based on its exponent.\n\nWhenever a possible prime is reported to the server, it is verified first before it is announced. The importance of this was illustrated in 2003, when a false positive was reported to possibly be the 40th Mersenne prime but verification failed.\n\n\n", "id": "12917", "title": "Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12919", "text": "Game.com\n\nThe Game.com (styled as \"\"game.com\"\" but pronounced \"\"game com\"\", not \"\"game dot com\"\") is a handheld game console released by Tiger Electronics in September 1997. It featured many new ideas for handheld consoles and was aimed at an older target audience, having PDA-style features and functions such as a touchscreen and stylus. A second version of the console was released as the Game.com Pocket Pro in September 1998, followed by the Game.com Pocket. The first game.com console included two slots for game cartridges and could be connected to a 14.4 kbit/s modem. The second and last revision reverted to a single cartridge slot.\n\nThe game.com was released in September 1997. By the end of the month, several games had been released for the console: \"Henry\", \"Indy 500\", \"Quiz Wiz\", \"Wheel of Fortune\", and \"Williams Arcade Classics\". \"Lights Out\" was also released as a pack-in game and Solitaire was built into the console. The console was powered by four AA batteries. Tiger produced equivalents to many Game Boy peripherals, such as the \"compete.com\" serial cable, allowing players to connect their consoles to play multiplayer games or exchange high scores. Branded items such as an AC adapter, earphones, and a carry-case were also made available.\n\nThe game.com touch screen had a fairly low sensor resolution along with no back-light, so it lacked precision and made it hard to see the on-screen controls. As with most portable devices in the 1990s, data storage was entirely dependent on a backup battery, and its failure would erase high scores or any other information stored within the console.\n\nTiger failed to sell the game.com to an older audience. While they were able to obtain game licenses like \"Wheel of Fortune\", \"Sonic the Hedgehog\", \"Mortal Kombat\", \"Duke Nukem\", and \"Resident Evil\", none of these games sold in great numbers.\n\nDevelopment of games, including licensed ones, were done in-house. SDKs were not known to be widely available, and third-party development (essential to the success of most gaming systems) was absent.\n\nAt the time, the platform was almost completely ignored by the gaming press. Tiger ran two television commercials promoting the game.com. The first, targeted towards casual gamers, depicts several angels complaining about how boring Heaven is, until a fallen angel appears to tempt them with game.com. The second, targeted more towards a hardcore gaming audience, satirizes Sega of America's aggressive commercials of the time, showing a mock marketing spokesman for the game.com insulting a crowd of gamers until they overwhelm him in an angry mob.\n\nIn an effort to revitalize their low sales, Tiger released the Game.com Pocket Pro in September 1998. This was a smaller version of the game.com which had the same specifications as the original except that it had a single cartridge slot, and required only two AA batteries. The initial version of the Pocket Pro featured a front-lit screen (although advertised as back-lit) and is distinguished by its rough-textured black case. A subsequent re-release, dubbed as the Game.com Pocket, omitted the front light and came in four translucent colors: green, blue, pink, and purple.\n\nBoth re-releases shared very limited success, and the console would be canceled in 2000, along with its exclusive internet service. Most of the console's problems were due to a small line-up of only 20 games, poor quality of some games, lack of third-party support, poor distribution and marketing. Unlike the original Game Boy, its screen suffered from very slow screen updates (known as \"\"ghosting\"\"), which makes fast moving objects blur and particularly hurt the fast-moving games Tiger sought licenses for. The Game.com Pocket Pro had a slightly better display than the first model — on par with the Game Boy Pocket's — with less of a \"ghosting\" problem.\n\nAlthough the game.com was a commercial failure, similar features were later used successfully in the Nintendo DS. The game.com was the first to include basic PDA-functions, the first to allow two game cartridges to be inserted at once, and the first handheld to allow Internet access.\n\nTo access the Internet, users had to connect an external dial-up modem to the game.com via a serial cable and dial into a game.com-exclusive ISP. From there, users could upload saved high scores (games do not feature online play functionalities), or check e-mail and access the web (text-only) if they had the Internet cartridge (sold separately from the modem). The game.com also supported other ISPs, although set up was a matter of trial-and-error. Both Tiger's now-defunct website and the included manual gave incorrect instructions for setting up a game.com for Internet access. Later, single-cartridge re-releases of the game.com could not access the web nor check e-mail. \n\nThe monthly fee, two extra peripherals, and setup which required users to remain close to a phone line to connect the console to the modem meant that only a small percentage of owners had a subscription to the game.com Internet service. \n\nThere were 20 games released for the game.com, as well as 9 known unreleased. \n\nReleased: \n\nCancelled:\n\nAt the time of its release in 1997, Chip and Jonathan Carter of the \"Chicago Tribune\" wrote about the console, \"Our early take is that game.com doesn't handle action games as well as other titles. The Indy 500 game, for instance, is nowhere near as smooth as a Game Boy title. But it's loaded with options, including a stylus for direct screen interface. Graphically, we'd have to say this has the potential to perform better than Game Boy. As for sound, game.com delivers better than any other hand-held on the market.\"\n\nSteven L. Kent, also writing for the \"Chicago Tribune\", wrote a year later that the console had an elegant design, as well as better sound and a higher-definition screen than the Game Boy: \"Elegant design, however, has not translated into ideal game play. Though Tiger has produced fighting, racing and shooting games for game.com, the games have noticeably slow frame rates. The racing game looks like a flickering silent picture show.\" In 2004, Kent included the modem and \"some PDA functionality\" as the console's strengths, while listing its \"Slow processor\" and \"lackluster library of games\" as weaknesses.\n\nBrett Alan Weiss of AllGame wrote, \"The game.com, the little system that (almost) could, constantly amazes me with the strength and scope of its sound effects. [...] It's astounding what power comes out of such a tiny little speaker.\"\n\n", "id": "12919", "title": "Game.com"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12920", "text": "General Packet Radio Service\n\nGeneral Packet Radio Service (GPRS) is a packet oriented mobile data service on the 2G and 3G cellular communication system's global system for mobile communications (GSM). GPRS was originally standardized by European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) in response to the earlier CDPD and i-mode packet-switched cellular technologies. It is now maintained by the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP).\n\nGPRS usage is typically charged based on volume of data transferred, contrasting with circuit switched data, which is usually billed per minute of connection time. Sometimes billing time is broken down to every third of a minute. Usage above the bundle cap is charged per megabyte, speed limited, or disallowed.\n\nGPRS is a best-effort service, implying variable throughput and latency that depend on the number of other users sharing the service concurrently, as opposed to circuit switching, where a certain quality of service (QoS) is guaranteed during the connection. In 2G systems, GPRS provides data rates of 56–114 kbit/second. 2G cellular technology combined with GPRS is sometimes described as \"2.5G\", that is, a technology between the second (2G) and third (3G) generations of mobile telephony. It provides moderate-speed data transfer, by using unused time division multiple access (TDMA) channels in, for example, the GSM system. GPRS is integrated into GSM Release 97 and newer releases.\n\nThe GPRS core network allows 2G, 3G and WCDMA mobile networks to transmit IP packets to external networks such as the Internet. The GPRS system is an integrated part of the GSM network switching subsystem.\n\nGPRS extends the GSM Packet circuit switched data capabilities and makes the following services possible:\n\nIf SMS over GPRS is used, an SMS transmission speed of about 30 SMS messages per minute may be achieved. This is much faster than using the ordinary SMS over GSM, whose SMS transmission speed is about 6 to 10 SMS messages per minute.\n\nGPRS supports the following protocols:\n\nWhen TCP/IP is used, each phone can have one or more IP addresses allocated. GPRS will store and forward the IP packets to the phone even during handover. The TCP handles any packet loss (e.g. due to a radio noise induced pause).\n\nDevices supporting GPRS are divided into three classes:\n\n\nA true Class A device may be required to transmit on two different frequencies at the same time, and thus will need two radios. To get around this expensive requirement, a GPRS mobile may implement the dual transfer mode (DTM) feature. A DTM-capable mobile may use simultaneous voice and packet data, with the network coordinating to ensure that it is not required to transmit on two different frequencies at the same time. Such mobiles are considered pseudo-Class A, sometimes referred to as \"simple class A\". Some networks support DTM since 2007.\nUSB 3G/GPRS modems use a terminal-like interface over USB 1.1, 2.0 and later, data formats V.42bis, and RFC 1144 and some models have connector for external antenna. Modems can be added as cards (for laptops) or external USB devices which are similar in shape and size to a computer mouse, or nowadays more like a pendrive.\n\nA GPRS connection is established by reference to its access point name (APN). The APN defines the services such as wireless application protocol (WAP)\naccess, short message service (SMS), multimedia messaging service (MMS), and for Internet communication services such as email and World Wide Web access.\n\nIn order to set up a GPRS connection for a wireless modem, a user must specify an APN, optionally a user name and password, and very rarely an IP address, provided by the network operator.\n\nGSM module or GPRS modules are similar to modems, but there’s one difference: the modem is an external piece of equipment, whereas the GSM module or GPRS module can be integrated within an electrical or electronic equipment. It is an embedded piece of hardware. A GSM mobile, on the other hand, is a complete embedded system in itself. It comes with embedded processors dedicated to provide a functional interface between the user and the mobile network.\n\nThe upload and download speeds that can be achieved in GPRS depend on a number of factors such as:\n\n\nThe multiple access methods used in GSM with GPRS are based on frequency division duplex (FDD) and TDMA. During a session, a user is assigned to one pair of up-link and down-link frequency channels. This is combined with time domain statistical multiplexing which makes it possible for several users to share the same frequency channel. The packets have constant length, corresponding to a GSM time slot. The down-link uses first-come first-served packet scheduling, while the up-link uses a scheme very similar to reservation ALOHA (R-ALOHA). This means that slotted ALOHA (S-ALOHA) is used for reservation inquiries during a contention phase, and then the actual data is transferred using dynamic TDMA with first-come first-served.\n\nThe channel encoding process in GPRS consists of two steps: first, a cyclic code is used to add parity bits, which are also referred to as the Block Check Sequence, followed by coding with a possibly punctured convolutional code. The Coding Schemes CS-1 to CS-4 specify the number of parity bits generated by the cyclic code and the puncturing rate of the convolutional code. In Coding Schemes CS-1 through CS-3, the convolutional code is of rate 1/2, i.e. each input bit is converted into two coded bits. In Coding Schemes CS-2 and CS-3, the output of the convolutional code is punctured to achieve the desired code rate. In Coding Scheme CS-4, no convolutional coding is applied. The following table summarises the options.\n\nThe least robust, but fastest, coding scheme (CS-4) is available near a base transceiver station (BTS), while the most robust coding scheme (CS-1) is used when the mobile station (MS) is further away from a BTS.\n\nUsing the CS-4 it is possible to achieve a user speed of 20.0 kbit/s per time slot. However, using this scheme the cell coverage is 25% of normal. CS-1 can achieve a user speed of only 8.0 kbit/s per time slot, but has 98% of normal coverage. Newer network equipment can adapt the transfer speed automatically depending on the mobile location.\n\nIn addition to GPRS, there are two other GSM technologies which deliver data services: circuit-switched data (CSD) and high-speed circuit-switched data (HSCSD). In contrast to the shared nature of GPRS, these instead establish a dedicated circuit (usually billed per minute). Some applications such as video calling may prefer HSCSD, especially when there is a continuous flow of data between the endpoints.\n\nThe following table summarises some possible configurations of GPRS and circuit switched data services.\n\nThe multislot class determines the speed of data transfer available in the Uplink and Downlink directions. It is a value between 1 and 45 which the network uses to allocate radio channels in the uplink and downlink direction. Multislot class with values greater than 31 are referred to as high multislot classes.\n\nA multislot allocation is represented as, for example, 5+2. The first number is the number of downlink timeslots and the second is the number of uplink timeslots allocated for use by the mobile station. A commonly used value is class 10 for many GPRS/EGPRS mobiles which uses a maximum of 4 timeslots in downlink direction and 2 timeslots in uplink direction. However simultaneously a maximum number of 5 simultaneous timeslots can be used in both uplink and downlink. The network will automatically configure for either 3+2 or 4+1 operation depending on the nature of data transfer.\n\nSome high end mobiles, usually also supporting UMTS, also support GPRS/EDGE multislot class 32. According to 3GPP TS 45.002 (Release 12), Table B.1, mobile stations of this class support 5 timeslots in downlink and 3 timeslots in uplink with a maximum number of 6 simultaneously used timeslots. If data traffic is concentrated in downlink direction the network will configure the connection for 5+1 operation. When more data is transferred in the uplink the network can at any time change the constellation to 4+2 or 3+3. Under the best reception conditions, i.e. when the best EDGE modulation and coding scheme can be used, 5 timeslots can carry a bandwidth of 5*59.2 kbit/s = 296 kbit/s. In uplink direction, 3 timeslots can carry a bandwidth of 3*59.2 kbit/s = 177.6 kbit/s.\n\nEach multislot class identifies the following:\n\nThe different multislot class specification is detailed in the Annex B of the 3GPP Technical Specification 45.002 (Multiplexing and multiple access on the radio path)\n\nThe maximum speed of a GPRS connection offered in 2003 was similar to a modem connection in an analog wire telephone network, about 32–40 kbit/s, depending on the phone used. Latency is very high; round-trip time (RTT) is typically about 600–700 ms and often reaches 1s. GPRS is typically prioritized lower than speech, and thus the quality of connection varies greatly.\n\nDevices with latency/RTT improvements (via, for example, the extended UL TBF mode feature) are generally available. Also, network upgrades of features are available with certain operators. With these enhancements the active round-trip time can be reduced, resulting in significant increase in application-level throughput speeds.\n\nGPRS opened in 2000 as a packet-switched data service embedded to the channel-switched cellular radio network GSM. GPRS extends the reach of the fixed Internet by connecting mobile terminals worldwide.\n\nThe CELLPAC protocol developed 1991-1993 was the trigger point for starting in 1993 specification of standard GPRS by ETSI SMG. Especially, the CELLPAC Voice & Data functions introduced in a 1993 ETSI Workshop contribution anticipate what was later known to be the roots of GPRS. This workshop contribution is referenced in 22 GPRS related US-Patents. Successor systems to GSM/GPRS like W-CDMA (UMTS) and LTE rely on key GPRS functions for mobile Internet access as introduced by CELLPAC.\n\nAccording to a study on history of GPRS development Bernhard Walke and his student Peter Decker are the inventors of GPRS – the first system providing worldwide mobile Internet access.\n\n\n", "id": "12920", "title": "General Packet Radio Service"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12922", "text": "Gnosis\n\nGnosis is the common Greek noun for knowledge (in the nominative case γνῶσις f.). It generally signifies a dualistic knowledge in the sense of mystical enlightenment or \"insight\". Gnosis taught the deliverance of man from the constraints of earthly existence through insight into an essential relationship, as soul or spirit, with a supramundane place of freedom.\n\nThe term is used in the context of ancient religions and philosophies, aspects of Judeo-Christian beliefs, particularly to the ideas that emerged during early Christian and Greco-Roman interaction during the 2nd century.\n\n\"Gnosis\" is a feminine Greek noun which means \"knowledge\". It is often used for personal knowledge compared with intellectual knowledge (εἶδειν \"eídein\"), as with the French \"connaitre\" compared with \"savoir\", or the German \"kennen\" rather than \"wissen\".\n\nLatin drops the Greek \"g\" so \"gno-\" becomes \"no-\" as in \"noscō\" meaning \"I know\", \"noscentia\" meaning \"knowledge\" and \"notus\" meaning \"known\". The \"g\" remains in the Latin \"co-gni-tio\" meaning \"knowledge\" and \"i-gno-tus\" and \"i-gna-rus\" meaning \"unknown\" and from which comes the word \"i-gno-rant\", and \"a-gno-stic\" which means \"not knowing\" and once again this reflects the Sanskrit \"jna\" which means \"to know\", \"to perceive\" or \"to understand\".\n\nA related term is the adjective \"gnostikos\", \"cognitive\", a reasonably common adjective in Classical Greek. Plato uses the plural adjective γνωστικοί – \"gnostikoi\" and the singular feminine adjective γνωστικὴ ἐπιστήμη – \"gnostike episteme\" in his \"Politikos\" where \"Gnostike episteme\" was also used to indicate one's aptitude. The terms do not appear to indicate any mystic, esoteric or hidden meaning in the works of Plato, but instead expressed a sort of higher intelligence and ability analogous to talent.\n\nIn the Hellenistic era the term became associated with the mystery cults.\n\n\"Gnosis\" is used throughout Greek philosophy as a technical term for experience knowledge (see gnosiology) in contrast to theoretical knowledge or epistemology. The term is also related to the study of knowledge retention or memory (see also cognition), in relation to ontic or ontological, which is how something actually is rather than how something is captured (abstraction) and stored (memory) in the mind.\n\nThe Neoplatonic philosophers, including Plotinus, rejected the gnostics as being un-Hellenistic and anti-Plato due to their vilification of Plato's creator of the universe (the demiurge), arriving at dystheism as the solution to the problem of evil, taking all their truths over from Plato. Plotinus did express that gnosis, via contemplation, was the highest goal of the philosopher toward henosis.\n\nThe Greek word \"gnosis\" (knowledge) is a standard translation of the Hebrew word \"knowledge\" (דעת da`ath) in the Septuagint, thus:\n\nPhilo also refers to the \"knowledge\" (\"gnosis\") and \"wisdom\" (\"sophia\") of God.\n\nPaul distinguishes \"knowledge\" (\"gnosis\") and \"knowledge falsely so-called\" (\"pseudonymos gnosis\"). This last phrase (from 1 Timothy 6:20) is the origin of the title of the book by Irenaeus, \"On the Detection and Overthrow of False Knowledge\", that contains the adjective \"gnostikos\", which is the source for the 17th-century English term \"Gnosticism\".\n\nThe fathers of early Christianity used the word \"knowledge\" (\"gnosis\") in the New Testament to mean spiritual knowledge or specific knowledge of the divine. This positive usage was to contrast it with how gnostic sectarians used the word. This positive use carried over from Hellenic philosophy into Greek Orthodoxy as a critical characteristic of ascetic practices, through St. Clement of Alexandria, Irenaeus, Hippolytus of Rome, Hegesippus, and Origen.\n\nCardiognosis (\"knowledge of the heart\") from Eastern Christianity related to the tradition of the staretz and in Roman Catholic theology is the view that only God knows the condition of one's relationship with God.\n\nAmong the gnostics, \"gnosis\" was first and foremost a matter of self-knowledge, which was considered the path leading to the goal of enlightenment as the hidden knowledge of the various pre-Judeo-Christian pagan mystery religions. Knowledge that first relieved the individual of their cultural religious indoctrination and then reconciled them to their personal deity. Through such self-knowledge and personal purification (virtuous living) the adept is led to direct knowledge of God via themselves as inner reflection or will. Later, Valentinius (Valentinus), taught that gnosis was the privileged \"Gnosis kardias\" \"knowledge of the heart\" or \"insight\" about the spiritual nature of the cosmos that brought about salvation to the \"pneumatics\"— the name given to those believed to have reached the final goal of sanctity.\n\nAccording to Samuel Angus (1920), gnosis in these early sects was distinct from the secret teachings revealed to initiates once they had reached a certain level of progression akin to arcanum. Rather, these teachings were paths to obtain \"gnosis\". (See e.g., \"fukasetsu\" (Japanese), or ineffability, a quality of realization common to many, if not most, esoteric traditions; see also Jung on the difference between sign and symbol.) Gnosis from this perspective being analogous, to the same meaning as the words occult and arcana. Arcanum is knowledge akin to prognostication (divination) derived by the various systems (metaphysical in nature) used to obtain foreknowledge from the Fates or fate (i.e. to tarot reading, cleromancy, magic or magical thinking).\n\nIn the formation of Christianity, various sectarian groups, labeled \"gnostics\" by their opponents, emphasised spiritual knowledge (\"gnosis\") over faith (\"pistis\") in the teachings and traditions of the various communities of Christians. The Gnostics considered the most essential part of the process of salvation to be this personal knowledge, in contrast to faith as an outlook in their world view along with faith in the ecclesiastical authority. They were regarded as heretics by the Fathers of the early church due to teaching this type of authority rejection referred to as antinomianism (see the lawless).\n\nThe knowledge of these Christian sectarian groups is contested by orthodox Christian theology as speculative knowledge derived from religio-philosophical (metaphysical) systems rather than knowledge derived from revelation coming from faith.\n\nGnosis itself is and was obtained through understanding at which one can arrive via inner experience or contemplation such as an internal epiphany for example. For the various sectarian gnostics, gnosis was obtained as speculative gnosis, instigated by the contemplation of their religio-philosophical (cosmological, metaphysical, salvational and rational) systems. These systems were pagan (folk) in origin and syncretic in nature.\n\nAccording to Hegemonius (4th century) Mani (3rd century) vilified the creator God of the pagan philosophers (Plato's demiurge) and the creator God of Judeo-Christianity (creator). Gnosticism presents a distinction between the highest, unknowable God and the demiurgic “creator” of the material. Several systems of Gnostic thought present the Demiurge as antagonistic to the will of the Supreme Being: his act of creation occurs in unconscious semblance of the divine model, and thus is fundamentally flawed, or else is formed with the malevolent intention of entrapping aspects of the divine \"in\" materiality. Thus, in such systems, the Demiurge acts as a solution to the problem of evil. According to Samuel Angus (1925) the gnostic sectarians also sought to reconcile the individual to their own personal deification (henosis), making each individual God. As such the gnostic sects made a duality out of the difference between the activities of the spirit (\"nous\"), called noesis (insight), and those of faith.\n\nDuring the early formation of Christianity, church authorities (Fathers of the Church) exerted considerable amounts of energy attempting to weed out what were considered to be false doctrines (e.g., Irenaeus' On the Detection and Overthrow of False Gnosis). The gnostics (as one sectarian group) held views which were incompatible with the emerging Ante-Nicene community. Among Christian heresiologists, the concept of \"false gnosis\" was used to denote different Pagan, Jewish or Christian belief systems (e.g., the Eleusinian Mysteries or Glycon) and their various teachings of what was deemed\n\"religio-philosophical\" systems of knowledge, as opposed to authentic \"gnosis\" (\"see below, Gnosis among the Greek Fathers\"). The sectarians used gnosis or secret, hidden knowledge to reject the traditions of the established community or church. The authorities throughout the community criticized this antinomianism as inconsistent with the communities teachings. Hence sectarians and followers of gnosticism were first rejected by the Jewish communities of the Mediterranean (see the Notzrim 139–67 BCE), then by the Christian communities and finally by the late Hellenistic philosophical communities (see Neoplatonism and Gnosticism).\n\nThough his sources on Gnosticism were secondary, since the texts in the Nag Hammadi library were not yet widely available, Eric Voegelin (1901–1985), partially building on the concept of gnosis as used by Plato and the followers of Gnosticism, along with how it was defined by Hans Jonas, defined the gnosis of the followers of Gnosticism as religious philosophical teachings that are the foundations of cults. Voegelin identified a number of similarities between ancient Gnosticism and those held by a number of modernist political theories, particularly communism and nazism.\n\nGnosis in Orthodox Christian (especially Eastern Orthodox) thought is the spiritual knowledge of a saint (one who has obtained theosis) or mystically enlightened human being. Within the cultures of the term's provenance (Byzantine and Hellenic) \"Gnosis\" was a knowledge or insight into the infinite, divine and uncreated in all and above all, rather than knowledge strictly into the finite, natural or material world. Gnosis is a transcendental as well as mature understanding. It indicates direct spiritual experiential knowledge and intuitive knowledge, mystic rather than that from rational or reasoned thinking. Gnosis itself is obtained through understanding at which one can arrive via inner experience or contemplation such as an internal epiphany of intuition and external epiphany such as the Theophany.\n\nIn the \"Philokalia\" it is emphasized that such knowledge is not secret knowledge but rather a maturing, transcendent form of knowledge derived from contemplation (\"theoria\" resulting from practice of \"hesychasm)\", since knowledge cannot truly be derived from knowledge but rather knowledge can only be derived from \"theoria\" (to witness, see (vision) or experience). Knowledge thus plays an important role in relation to \"theosis\" (deification/personal relationship with God) and \"theoria\" (revelation of the divine, vision of God). Gnosis, as the proper use of the spiritual or noetic faculty plays an important role in Orthodox Christian theology. Its importance in the economy of salvation is discussed periodically in the \"Philokalia\" where as direct, personal knowledge of God (noesis; see also Noema) it is distinguished from ordinary epistemological knowledge (episteme—i.e., speculative philosophy).\n\n", "id": "12922", "title": "Gnosis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12923", "text": "Georgian\n\nGeorgian may refer to:\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "12923", "title": "Georgian"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12924", "text": "Georgian architecture\n\nGeorgian architecture is the name given in most English-speaking countries to the set of architectural styles current between 1714 and 1830. It is eponymous for the first four British monarchs of the House of Hanover—George I, George II, George III, and George IV—who reigned in continuous succession from August 1714 to June 1830. The style was revived in the late 19th century in the United States as Colonial Revival architecture and in the early 20th century in Great Britain as Neo-Georgian architecture; in both it is also called Georgian Revival architecture. In America the term \"Georgian\" is generally used to describe all building from the period, regardless of style; in Britain it is generally restricted to buildings that are \"architectural in intention\", and have stylistic characteristics that are typical of the period, though that covers a wide range. \n\nThe style of Georgian buildings is very variable, but marked by a taste for symmetry and proportion based on the classical architecture of Greece and Rome, as revived in Renaissance architecture. Ornament is also normally in the classical tradition, but typically rather restrained, and sometimes almost completely absent on the exterior. The period brought the vocabulary of classical architecture to smaller and more modest buildings than had been the case before, replacing English vernacular architecture (or becoming the new vernacular style) for almost all new middle-class homes and public buildings by the end of the period.\n\nIn towns, which expanded greatly during the period, landowners turned into property developers, and rows of identical terraced houses became the norm. Even the wealthy were persuaded to live in these in town, especially if provided with a square of garden in front of the house. There was an enormous amount of building in the period, all over the English-speaking world, and the standards of construction were generally high. Where they have not been demolished, large numbers of Georgian buildings have survived two centuries or more, and they still form large parts of the core of cities such as London, Edinburgh, Dublin and Bristol.\n\nThe period saw the growth of a distinct and trained architectural profession; before the mid-century \"the high-sounding title, 'architect' was adopted by anyone who could get away with it\". This contrasted with earlier styles, which were primarily disseminated among craftsmen through the direct experience of the apprenticeship system. But most buildings were still designed by builders and landlords together, and the wide spread of Georgian architecture, and the Georgian styles of design more generally, came from dissemination through pattern books and inexpensive suites of engravings. Authors such as the prolific William Halfpenny (active 1723–1755) published editions in America as well as Britain. A similar phenomena can be seen in the commonality of housing designs in the United States (though of a wider variety of styles) in housing constructed 1880-1940s where many mail order catalog services offered house plans, including giant retailers J.C. Penny and Sears Roebuck and Company.\nFrom the mid-18th century, Georgian styles were assimilated into an architectural vernacular that became part and parcel of the training of every architect, designer, builder, carpenter, mason and plasterer, from Edinburgh to Maryland.\n\nGeorgian succeeded the English Baroque of Sir Christopher Wren, Sir John Vanbrugh, Thomas Archer, William Talman, and Nicholas Hawksmoor; this in fact continued into at least the 1720s, overlapping with a more restrained Georgian style. The architect James Gibbs was a transitional figure, his earlier buildings are Baroque, reflecting the time he spent in Rome in the early 18th century, but he adjusted his style after 1720. Major architects to promote the change in direction from baroque were Colen Campbell, author of the influential book \"Vitruvius Britannicus\" (1715-1725); Richard Boyle, 3rd Earl of Burlington and his protégé William Kent; Isaac Ware; Henry Flitcroft and the Venetian Giacomo Leoni, who spent most of his career in England. Other prominent architects of the early Georgian period include James Paine, Robert Taylor, and John Wood, the Elder. The European Grand Tour became very common for wealthy patrons in the period, and Italian influence remained dominant, though at the start of the period Hanover Square, Westminster (1713 on), developed and occupied by Whig supporters of the new dynasty, seems to have deliberately adopted German stylisic elements in their honour, especially vertical bands connecting the windows.\n\nThe styles that resulted fall within several categories. In the mainstream of Georgian style were both Palladian architecture— and its whimsical alternatives, Gothic and Chinoiserie, which were the English-speaking world's equivalent of European Rococo. From the mid-1760s a range of Neoclassical modes were fashionable, associated with the British architects Robert Adam, James Gibbs, Sir William Chambers, James Wyatt, George Dance the Younger, Henry Holland and Sir John Soane. John Nash was one of the most prolific architects of the late Georgian era known as The Regency style, he was responsible for designing large areas of London. Greek Revival architecture was added to the repertory, beginning around 1750, but increasing in popularity after 1800. Leading exponents were William Wilkins and Robert Smirke. \nGeorgian architecture is characterized by its proportion and balance; simple mathematical ratios were used to determine the height of a window in relation to its width or the shape of a room as a double cube. Regularity, as with ashlar (uniformly cut) stonework, was strongly approved, imbuing symmetry and adherence to classical rules: the lack of symmetry, where Georgian additions were added to earlier structures remaining visible, was deeply felt as a flaw, at least before Nash began to introduce it in a variety of styles. Regularity of housefronts along a street was a desirable feature of Georgian town planning. Until the start of the Gothic Revival in the early 19th century, Georgian designs usually lay within the Classical orders of architecture and employed a decorative vocabulary derived from ancient Rome or Greece.\n\nIn Britain brick or stone are almost invariably used; brick is often disguised with stucco. In America and other colonies wood remained very common, as its availability and cost-ratio with the other materials was more favourable. Raked roofs were mostly covered in earthenware tiles until Richard Pennant, 1st Baron Penrhyn led the development of the slate industry in Wales from the 1760s, which by the end of the century had become the usual material.\n\nVersions of revived Palladian architecture dominated English country house architecture. Houses were increasingly placed in grand landscaped settings, and large houses were generally made wide and relatively shallow, largely to look more impressive from a distance. The height was usually highest in the centre, and the Baroque emphasis on corner pavilions often found on the continent generally avoided. In grand houses, an entrance hall led to steps up to a \"piano nobile\" or mezzanine floor where the main reception rooms were. Typically the basement area or \"rustic\", with kitchens, offices and service areas, as well as male guests with muddy boots, came some way above ground, and was lit by windows that were high on the inside, but just above ground level outside. A single block was typical, with a perhaps a small court for carriages at the front marked off by railings and a gate, but rarely a stone gatehouse, or side wings around the court.\n\nWindows in all types of buildings were large and regularly placed on a grid; this was partly to minimize window tax, which was in force throughout the period in the United Kingdom. Some windows were subsequently bricked-in. Their height increasingly varied between the floors, and they increasingly began below waist-height in the main rooms, making a small balcony desirable. Before this the internal plan and function of the rooms can generally not be deduced from the outside. To open these large windows the sash window, already developed by the 1670s, became very widespread. Corridor plans became universal inside larger houses.\n\nInternal courtyards became more rare, except beside the stables, and the functional parts of the building were placed at the sides, or in separate buildings nearby hidden by trees. The views to and from the front and rear of the main block were concentrated on, with the side approaches usually much less important. The roof was typically invisible from the ground, though domes were sometimes visible in grander buildings. The roofline was generally clear of ornament except for a balustrade or the top of a pediment. Columns or pilasters, often topped by a pediment, were popular for ornament inside and out, and other ornament was generally geometrical or plant-based, rather than using the human figure. \nInside ornament was far more generous, and could sometimes be overwhelming. The chimneypiece continued to be the usual main focus of rooms, and was now given a classical treatment, and increasingly topped by a painting or a mirror. Plasterwork ceilings, carved wood, and bold schemes of wallpaint formed a backdrop to increasingly rich collections of furniture, paintings, porcelain, mirrors, and objets d'art of all kinds. Wood-panelling, very common since about 1500, fell from favour around the mid-century, and wallpaper included very expensive imports from China.\n\nSmaller houses in the country, such as vicarages, were simple regular blocks with visible raked roofs, and a central doorway, often the only ornamented area. Similar houses, often referred to as \"villas\" became common around the fringes of the larger cities, especially London, and detached houses in towns remained common, though only the very rich could afford them in central London.\n\nIn towns even most better-off people lived in terraced houses, which typically opened straight onto the street, often with a few steps up to the door. There was often an open space, protected by iron railings, dropping down to the basement level, with a discreet entrance down steps off the street for servants and deliveries; this is known as the \"area\". This meant that the ground floor front was now removed and protected from the street and encouraged the main reception rooms to move there from the floor above. Where, as often, a new street or set of streets was developed, the road and pavements were raised up, and the gardens or yards behind the houses at a lower level, usually representing the original one.\n\nTown terraced houses for all social classes remained resolutely tall and narrow, each dwelling occupying the whole height of the building. This contrasted with well-off continental dwellings, which had already begun to be formed of wide apartments occupying only one or two floors of a building; such arrangements were only typical in England when housing groups of batchelors, as in Oxbridge colleges, the lawyers in the Inns of Court or The Albany after it was converted in 1802. In the period in question, only in Edinburgh were working-class purpose-built tenements common, though lodgers were common in other cities. A curving crescent, often looking out at gardens or a park, was popular for terraces where space allowed. In early and central schemes of development, plots were sold and built on individually, though there was often an attempt to enforce some uniformity, but as development reached further out schemes were increasingly built as a uniform scheme and then sold. \n\nThe late Georgian period saw the birth of the semi-detached house, planned systematically, as a suburban compromise between the terraced houses of the city and the detached \"villas\" further out, where land was cheaper. There had been occasional examples in town centres going back to medieval times. Most early suburban examples are large, and in what are now the outer fringes of Central London, but were then in areas being built up for the first time. Blackheath, Chalk Farm and St John's Wood are among the areas contesting being the original home of the semi. Sir John Summerson gave primacy to the Eyre Estate of St John's Wood. A plan for this exists dated 1794, where \"the whole development consists of \"pairs of semi-detached houses\", So far as I know, this is the first recorded scheme of the kind\". In fact the French Wars put an end to this scheme, but when the development was finally built it retained the semi-detached form, \"a revolution of striking significance and far-reaching effect\".\n\nUntil the Church Building Act of 1818, the period saw relatively few churches built in Britain, which was already well-supplied, although in the later years of the period the demand for Non-conformist and Roman Catholic places of worship greatly increased. Anglican churches that were built were designed internally to allow maximum audibility, and visibility, for preaching, so the main nave was generally wider and shorter than in medieval plans, and often there were no side-aisles. Galleries were common in new churches. Especially in country parishes, the external appearance generally retained the familiar signifiers of a Gothic church, with a tower or spire, a large west front with one or more doors, and very large windows along the nave, but all with any ornament drawn from the classical vocabulary. Where funds permitted, a classical temple portico with columns and a pediment might be used at the west front. Decoration inside was very limited, but churches filled up with monuments to the prosperous.\n\nIn the colonies new churches were certainly required, and generally repeated similar formulae. British Non-conformist churches were often more classical in mood, and tended not to feel the need for a tower or steeple.\n\nThe archetypical Georgian church is St Martin-in-the-Fields in London (1720), by Gibbs, who boldly added to the classical temple façade at the west end a large steeple on top of a tower, set back slightly from the main frontage. This formula shocked purists and foreigners, but became accepted and was very widely copied, at home and in the colonies, for example at St Andrew's Church, Chennai in India.\n\nThe 1818 Act allocated some public money for new churches required to reflect changes in population, and a commission to allocate it. Building of Commissioners' churches gathered pace in the 1820s, and continued until the 1850s. The early churches, falling into the Georgian period, show a high proportion of Gothic Revival buildings, along with the classically inspired.\n\nPublic buildings generally varied between the extremes of plain boxes with grid windows and Italian Late Renaissance palaces, depending on budget. Somerset House in London, designed by Sir William Chambers in 1776 for government offices, was as magnificent as any country house, though never quite finished, as funds ran out. Barracks and other less prestigious buildings could be as functional as the mills and factories that were growing increasingly large by the end of the period. But as the period came to an end many commercial projects were becoming sufficiently large, and well-funded, to become \"architectural in intention\", rather than having their design left to the lesser class of \"surveyors\".\n\nGeorgian architecture was widely disseminated in the English colonies during the Georgian era. American buildings of the Georgian period were very often constructed of wood with clapboards; even columns were made of timber, framed up, and turned on an oversized lathe. At the start of the period the difficulties of obtaining and transporting brick or stone made them a common alternative only in the larger cities, or where they were obtainable locally. Dartmouth College, Harvard University, and the College of William and Mary, offer leading examples of Georgian architecture in the Americas.\n\nUnlike the Baroque style that it replaced, which was mostly used for palaces and churches, and had little representation in the British colonies, simpler Georgian styles were widely used by the upper and middle classes. Perhaps the best remaining house is the pristine Hammond-Harwood House (1774) in Annapolis, Maryland, designed by the colonial architect William Buckland and modelled on the Villa Pisani at Montagnana, Italy as depicted in Andrea Palladio's \"I quattro libri dell'architettura\" (\"Four Books of Architecture\").\n\nAfter independence, in the former American colonies, Federal style architecture represented the equivalent of Regency architecture, with which it had much in common.\n\nAfter about 1840, Georgian conventions were slowly abandoned as a number of revival styles, including Gothic Revival, that had originated in the Georgian period, developed and contested in Victorian architecture, and in the case of Gothic became better researched, and closer to their originals. Neoclassical architecture remained popular, and was the opponent of Gothic in the Battle of the Styles of the early Victorian period. In the United States the Federalist Style contained many elements of Georgian style, but incorporated revolutionary symbols.\n\nIn the early decades of the twentieth century when there was a growing nostalgia for its sense of order, the style was revived and adapted and in the United States came to be known as the Colonial Revival. In Canada the United Empire Loyalists embraced Georgian architecture as a sign of their fealty to Britain, and the Georgian style was dominant in the country for most of the first half of the 19th century. The Grange, for example, a manor built in Toronto, was built in 1817. In Montreal, English born architect John Ostell worked on a significant number of remarkable constructions in the Georgian style such as the Old Montreal Custom House and the Grand séminaire de Montréal.\n\nThe revived Georgian style that emerged in Britain at the beginning of the 20th century is usually referred to as Neo-Georgian; the work of Edwin Lutyens includes many examples. Versions of the Neo-Georgian style were commonly used in Britain for certain types of urban architecture until the late 1950s, Bradshaw Gass & Hope's Police Headquarters in Salford of 1958 being a good example. In both the United States and Britain, the Georgian style is still employed by architects like Quinlan Terry Julian Bicknell and Fairfax and Sammons for private residences.\n\n\n\n", "id": "12924", "title": "Georgian architecture"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12926", "text": "Goshen, Indiana\n\nGoshen is a city in and the county seat of Elkhart County, Indiana, United States. It is the smaller of the two principal cities of the Elkhart-Goshen Metropolitan Statistical Area, which in turn is part of the South Bend-Elkhart-Mishawaka Combined Statistical Area. It is located in the northern part of Indiana near the Michigan border, in a region known as Michiana. Goshen is located 10 miles southeast of Elkhart, 25 miles southeast of South Bend, 120 miles east of Chicago, and 150 miles north of Indianapolis. The population was 31,719 at the 2010 census. The city is known as a center of manufacturing for recreational vehicles and accessories, the home of Goshen College, a small Mennonite liberal arts college, and home to the Elkhart County 4-H Fair, one of the largest county fairs in the United States.\n\nGoshen was platted in 1831. It was named after the Land of Goshen. The initial settlers consisted entirely of old stock \"Yankee\" immigrants, who were descended from the English Puritans who settled New England in the 1600s. The New England Yankee population that founded towns such as Goshen considered themselves the \"chosen people\" and identified with the Israelites of the Old Testament and they thought of North America as their Canaan. They founded a large number of towns and counties across what is known as the Northern Tier of the upper midwest. It was in this context that Goshen was named.\n\nThe Yankee migration to Indiana was a result of several factors, one of which was the overpopulation of New England. The old stock Yankee population had large families, often bearing up to ten children in one household. Most people were expected to have their own piece of land to farm, and due to the massive and nonstop population boom, land in New England became scarce as every son claimed his own farmstead. As a result, there was not enough land for every family to have a self-sustaining farm, and Yankee settlers began leaving New England for the Midwestern United States.\n\nThey were aided in this effort by the construction and completion of the Erie Canal which made traveling to the region much easier, causing an additional surge in migrants coming from New England. Added to this was the end of the Black Hawk War, which made the region much safer to travel through and settle in for white settlers. These settlers were primarily members of the Congregational Church, though due to the Second Great Awakening, many of them had converted to Methodism, and some had become Baptists before coming to what is now Indiana. The Congregational Church has subsequently gone through many divisions, and some factions, including those in Goshen, are now known as the Church of Christ and the United Church of Christ. When the New Englanders arrived in what is now Elkhart County there was nothing but dense virgin forest and wild prairie. They laid out farms, constructed roads, erected government buildings and established post routes.\nOn Palm Sunday, April 11, 1965, a large outbreak of tornadoes struck the Midwest. The most famous pair of tornadoes devastated the Midway Trailer Park (now inside the city limits of Goshen), and the Sunnyside Housing Addition in Dunlap, Indiana, but a smaller F4 tornado also struck neighborhoods on the southeast side of Goshen on the same day. Statewide, 137 Hoosiers died in the storms—55 of them in Elkhart County. Days later, President Lyndon B. Johnson visited the Dunlap site.\n\nThe Goshen Historic district, added in 1983 to the National Registor of Historic Places is bounded by Pike, RR, Cottage, Plymouth, Main, Purl, the Canal, and Second Sts. with the Elkhart County Courthouse at its center.\n\nIn April 2006, Goshen was the site for an immigration march. Officials estimated that from 2000 to 3000 people marched from Linway Plaza to the County Courthouse.\n\nFor much of its history, Goshen was a \"sundown town\", forbidding African Americans from living in, or entering, the town, often under threat of violence. In March 2015, the city acknowledged this part of its past, apologizing and saying that it no longer condones such behavior.\n\nThe Elkhart County Courthouse, Fort Wayne Street Bridge, Goshen Carnegie Public Library, Goshen Historic District, William N. Violett House, and Violett-Martin House and Gardens are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.\n\nGoshen is located at . The Elkhart River winds its way through the city and through a dam on the south side making the Goshen Dam Pond. Rock Run Creek also runs through town. The city is divided east/west by Main Street and north/south by Lincoln Avenue.\n\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and is water.\n\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 31,719 people, 11,344 households, and 7,580 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 12,631 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 78.2% White, 2.6% African American, 0.5% Native American, 1.2% Asian, 14.8% from other races, and 2.7% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 28.1% of the population.\n\nThere were 11,344 households of which 36.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 47.4% were married couples living together, 13.1% had a female householder with no husband present, 6.3% had a male householder with no wife present, and 33.2% were non-families. 27.4% of all households were made up of individuals and 13.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.67 and the average family size was 3.23.\n\nThe median age in the city was 32.4 years. 27.4% of residents were under the age of 18; 11.3% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 26.1% were from 25 to 44; 20% were from 45 to 64; and 14.9% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 48.9% male and 51.1% female.\n\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 29,383 people, 10,675 households, and 7,088 families residing in the city. The population density was 2,227.7 people per square mile (860.1/km²). There were 11,264 housing units at an average density of 854.0 per square mile (329.7/km²). The racial makeup of the city was 83.15% White, 1.53% Black or African American, 0.26% Native American, 1.10% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 12.00% from other races, and 1.94% from two or more races. 19.33% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\n\nThere were 10,675 households out of which 32.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.8% were married couples living together, 10.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.6% were non-families. 27.5% of all households were made up of individuals and 12.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.61 and the average family size was 3.14.\n\nIn the city the population was spread out with 25.9% under the age of 18, 12.9% from 18 to 24, 30.0% from 25 to 44, 17.6% from 45 to 64, and 13.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 32 years. For every 100 females there were 100.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 97.7 males.\n\nThe median income for a household in the city was $39,383, and the median income for a family was $46,877. Males had a median income of $32,159 versus $23,290 for females. The per capita income for the city was $18,899. About 6.0% of families and 9.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 11.8% of those under age 18 and 5.3% of those age 65 or over.\n\nIndustry in Goshen centers around the automotive and Recreational Vehicle business. There are automotive component manufacturers like Benteler; firms that build custom bodies onto chassis like Supreme, Independent Protection and Showhauler Trucks. RV manufacturing companies include Dutchmen, Forest River and Keystone.\n\nThe government consists of a mayor, a clerk, treasurer and a city council. The mayor and clerk are elected in citywide vote. The city council consists of seven members. Five are elected from individual districts. Two are elected at-large.\n\nGoshen Community Schools serves all of the city that is inside of Elkhart Township. This system consists of seven elementary schools, Goshen Middle School, and Goshen High School.\n\nIn 2012, U.S. News & World Report ranked Goshen High School as the 12th best high school in Indiana, as well as in the top 6% of high schools in the entire country.\n\nSmall parts of the city of Goshen are covered by several other school districts, including Fairfield Community Schools, Middlebury Community Schools, Concord Community Schools, and WaNee Community Schools.\n\nGoshen College, located on the south side of town, has a current enrollment of approximately 885, with 40% being male, and 60% being female. Tuition and fees for the 2011–2012 year were $25,700.\n\nGoshen Municipal Airport is a public use airport located three nautical miles (6 km) southeast of the central business district of Goshen. It is owned by the Goshen Board of Aviation Commissioners.\n\nThe Interurban Trolley bus connects Goshen to the nearby city of Elkhart and the unincorporated town of Dunlap via Concord and Elkhart-Goshen routes. The routes pass at Elkhart's Amtrak station, allowing passengers to connect to the \"Capitol Limited\" and \"Lake Shore Limited\" trains. Riders can also transfer to North Pointe route and Bittersweet/Mishawaka route. The former allows riders to connect to Elkhart's Greyhound bus station, while the later connects the riders to the city of Mishawaka and town of Osceola. The Bittersweet/Mishawaka route also allows them to transfer to TRANSPO Route 9 to connect to destinations throughout the South Bend-Goshen metropolitan region and the South Shore Line's South Bend Regional Airport station.\n\nGoshen has seven parks and has a few different greenways and trails winding through the city, one of which runs along the old Mill Race and hydraulic canal which was once used to power an old hydroelectric power plant. Plans drawn up in 2005 call for the plant to be reopened and redevelopment to begin along the canal.\n\nThe Pumpkinvine Nature Trail runs from Goshen to Middlebury and Shipshewana, along the former Pumpkin Vine Railroad. The trail starts north east of Goshen at Abshire Park. It is one of the recreational highlights of Goshen. Along with the Maple City Greenway and the Millrace trail, they provide many miles of easily accessible trails for walking, running, and biking.\n\nThe Elkhart County Fairgrounds are also located in the city, where in late July, the Elkhart County 4-H Fair is held. It is the largest county fair in Indiana and one of the largest 4-H County Fairs in the United States.\n\nThe Goshen Air Show is also an annual event that takes place at the Goshen Municipal Airport.\n\nIn 2007, Downtown Goshen, Inc., a public-private partnership formed from the merger of Face of the City and the Downtown Action Team, started a First Fridays program. Occurring year round, First Fridays happens on the first Friday of each month with stores open until 9, music and other entertainment, and other events occurring within Goshen's downtown district.\n\nThe south side Wal-Mart is rumored to be the first Wal-Mart in the United States to provide a covered stable for its frequent Amish customers. The Amish built the stable with lumber and other supplies donated by Wal-Mart.\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "12926", "title": "Goshen, Indiana"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12929", "text": "Gallipoli\n\nThe Gallipoli peninsula (; ; ) is located in Turkish Thrace (or East Thrace), the European part of Turkey, with the Aegean Sea to the west and the Dardanelles strait to the east.\n\nGallipoli is an Italian word derived from the Greek \"Καλλίπολις\" (\"Kallipolis\"), meaning \"Beautiful City\". In antiquity, it was known as the Thracian Chersonese (, \"Thrakike Chersonesos\"; ).\n\nThe peninsula runs in a south-westerly direction into the Aegean Sea, between the Hellespont (now known as the Dardanelles) and the bay of Melas (today Saros bay). Near Agora it was protected by a wall running across its full breadth. The isthmus traversed by the wall was only 36 stadia in breadth (about 6.5 km), but the length of the peninsula from this wall to its southern extremity, Cape Mastusia, was 420 stadia (about 77.5 km).\n\nIn ancient times, the Gallipoli Peninsula was known as the Thracian Chersonesus (from Greek \"χερσόνησος\", \"peninsula\") to the Greeks and later the Romans. It was the location of several prominent towns, including Cardia, Pactya, Callipolis (Gallipoli), Alopeconnesus, Sestos, Madytos, and Elaeus. The peninsula was renowned for its wheat. It also benefited from its strategic importance on the main route between Europe and Asia, as well as from its control of the shipping route from Crimea. The city of Sestos was the main crossing-point on the Hellespont (Dardanelles).\n\nAccording to Herodotus, the Thracian tribe of Dolonci (or \"barbarians\" according to Cornelius Nepos) held possession of Chersonesus before the Greek colonization. Then, settlers from Ancient Greece, mainly of Ionian and Aeolian stock, founded about 12 cities on the peninsula in the 7th century BC. The Athenian statesman Miltiades the Elder founded a major Athenian colony there around 560 BC. He took authority over the entire peninsula, building up its defences against incursions from the mainland. It eventually passed to his nephew, the more famous Miltiades the Younger, around 524 BC. The peninsula was abandoned to the Persians in 493 BC after the outbreak of the Greco-Persian Wars (499–478 BC).\n\nThe Persians were eventually expelled, after which the peninsula was for a time ruled over by Athens, which enrolled it into the Delian League in 478 BC. The Athenians established a number of cleruchies on the Thracian Chersonese and sent an additional 1,000 settlers around 448 BC. Sparta gained control after the decisive battle of Aegospotami in 404 BC, but the peninsula subsequently reverted to the Athenians. In the 4th century BC, the Thracian Chersonese became the focus of a bitter territorial dispute between Athens and Macedon, whose king Philip II sought possession. It was eventually ceded to Philip in 338 BC.\n\nAfter the death of Philip's son Alexander the Great in 323 BC, the Thracian Chersonese became the object of contention among Alexander's successors. Lysimachus established his capital Lysimachia here. In 278 BC, Celtic tribes from Galatia in Asia Minor settled in the area. In 196 BC, the Seleucid king Antiochus III seized the peninsula. This alarmed the Greeks and prompted them to seek the aid of the Romans, who conquered the Thracian Chersonese, which they gave to their ally Eumenes II of Pergamon in 188 BC. At the extinction of the Attalid dynasty in 133 BC it passed again to the Romans, who from 129 BC administered it in the Roman province of Asia. It was subsequently made a state-owned territory (\"ager publicus\") and during the reign of the emperor Augustus it was imperial property.\n\nThe Thracian Chersonese was part of the Eastern Roman Empire from its foundation in 330 AD. In 443 AD, Attila the Hun invaded the Gallipoli Peninsula during one of the last stages of his grand campaign that year. He captured both Callipolis and Sestus, and destroyed a significant portion of the Eastern Roman Army.. Aside from a brief period from 1204 to 1235, when it was controlled by the Republic of Venice, the Byzantine Empire ruled the territory until 1356. During the night between the 1st and the 2nd of March 1354, a strong earthquake destroyed the city of Gallipoli and its city walls, weakening its defenses. In 1356 the peninsula became the first part of Europe to fall to the Ottoman Empire, which subsequently made it a major base for raids and incursions into territories further afield.\n\nAfter the devastating 1354 earthquake, the Greek city of Gallipoli was almost abandoned, but swiftly reoccupied by Turks from Anatolia, the Asiatic side of the straits, making Gallipoli the first Ottoman position in Europe, and the staging area for their expansion across the Balkans. It was recaptured for Byzantium by the Savoyard Crusade in 1366, but the beleaguered Byzantines were forced to hand it back in September 1376. The Greeks living there were allowed to continue their everyday life. In the 19th century, Gallipoli () was a district (kaymakamlik) in the Vilayet of Adrianople, with about thirty thousand inhabitants: comprising Greeks, Turks, Armenians and Jews.\n\nGallipoli became a major encampment for British and French forces in 1854 during the Crimean War, and the harbour was also a stopping-off point on the way to Constantinople.\n\nBritish and French engineers constructed in March 1854, a 7-mile line of defence to protect the peninsula from a possible Russian attack and so keep control of the route to the Mediterranean Sea.\n\nGallipoli did not experience any more wars until the First Balkan War, when the 1913 Battle of Bulair and several minor skirmishes took place here.\n\nDuring World War I, British and colonial forces attacked the peninsula in 1915, seeking to secure a route to relieve their eastern ally, Russia. The Ottomans set up defensive fortifications along the peninsula and the attackers were eventually repulsed.\n\nIn early 1915, attempting to seize a strategic advantage in World War I by capturing Constantinople, the British authorised an attack on the peninsula. The first Australian troops landed on early morning 25 April 1915 and after eight months of heavy fighting, the troops were withdrawn around the end of the year.\n\nThe campaign was one of the greatest Ottoman victories during the war and is considered a major Allied failure. In Turkey, it is regarded as a defining moment in the nation's history: a final surge in the defence of the motherland as the Ottoman Empire crumbled. The struggle formed the basis for the Turkish War of Independence and the founding of the Republic of Turkey eight years later under Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, who first rose to prominence as a commander at Gallipoli.\n\nThe Gallipoli Star was a military decoration created by the Ottoman Empire in 1915 and awarded for the duration of World War I.\n\nThe campaign was the first major military action of Australia and New Zealand as independent dominions, and is often considered to mark the birth of national consciousness in those nations. The date of the landing, 25 April, is known as \"Anzac Day\". It remains the most significant commemoration of military casualties and veterans in Australia and New Zealand.\n\nOn the Allied side one of the key promoters of the expedition was Britain's First Lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill, whose reputation took years to recover.\n\nGallipoli was occupied by Greek troops on 4 August 1920 during the Greco-Turkish War of 1919–22, considered part of the Turkish War of Independence, and after the Armistice of Mudros it became a Greek prefecture centre as \"Kallipolis\". However, Greece was forced to withdraw from Eastern Thrace after the Armistice of Mudanya. Gallipoli was briefly handed over to British troops on 20 October 1922, but was finally returned to Turkish rule on 26 November 1922.\n\nIn 1920, after the defeat of the Russian White army of General Pyotr Wrangel, a significant number of emigre soldiers and their families evacuated to Gallipoli from the Crimean Peninsula. From there, many went to European countries, such as Yugoslavia, where they found refuge. A stone monument was erected and a special \"Gallipoli cross\" was created to commemorate the soldiers, who stayed in Gallipoli. The stone monument was destroyed during an earthquake, but in January 2008 reconstruction of the monument had begun with the consent of the Turkish government.\n\nBetween 1923 and 1926 Gallipoli became the centre of Gelibolu Province, comprising the districts of Gelibolu, Eceabat, Keşan and Şarköy. After the dissolution of the province, it became a district centre in Çanakkale Province.\n\n\n\n", "id": "12929", "title": "Gallipoli"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12935", "text": "Gram staining\n\nGram staining or Gram stain, also called Gram's method, is a method of staining used to differentiate bacterial species into two large groups (gram-positive and gram-negative). The name comes from the Danish bacteriologist Hans Christian Gram, who developed the technique.\n\nGram staining differentiates bacteria by the chemical and physical properties of their cell walls by detecting peptidoglycan, which is present in the cell wall of Gram-positive bacteria. Gram-positive bacteria retain the crystal violet dye, and thus are stained violet, while the Gram-negative bacteria do not; after washing, a counterstain is added (commonly safranin or fuchsine) that will stain these Gram-negative bacteria a pink color. Both Gram-positive bacteria and Gram-negative bacteria pick up the counterstain. The counterstain, however, is unseen on Gram-positive bacteria because of the darker crystal violet stain.\n\nThe Gram stain is almost always the first step in the preliminary identification of a bacterial organism. While Gram staining is a valuable diagnostic tool in both clinical and research settings, not all bacteria can be definitively classified by this technique. This gives rise to \"gram-variable\" and \"gram-indeterminate\" groups.\n\nThe method is named after its inventor, the Danish scientist Hans Christian Gram (1853–1938), who developed the technique while working with Carl Friedländer in the morgue of the city hospital in Berlin in 1884. Gram devised his technique not for the purpose of distinguishing one type of bacterium from another but to make bacteria more visible in stained sections of lung tissue. He published his method in 1884, and included in his short report the observation that the typhus bacillus did not retain the stain.\n\nGram staining is a bacteriological laboratory technique used to differentiate bacterial species into two large groups (gram-positive and gram-negative) based on the physical properties of their cell walls. Gram staining is not used to classify archaea, formerly archaeabacteria, since these microorganisms yield widely varying responses that do not follow their phylogenetic groups.\n\nThe Gram stain is not an infallible tool for diagnosis, identification, or phylogeny, and it is of extremely limited use in environmental microbiology. It is used mainly to make a preliminary morphologic identification or to establish that there are significant numbers of bacteria in a clinical specimen. It cannot identify bacteria to the species level, and for most medical conditions, it should not be used as the sole method of bacterial identification. In clinical microbiology laboratories, it is used in combination with other traditional and molecular techniques to identify bacteria. Some organisms are gram-variable (meaning they may stain either negative or positive); some are not stained with either dye used in the Gram technique and are not seen. In a modern environmental or molecular microbiology lab, most identification is done using genetic sequences and other molecular techniques, which are far more specific and informative than differential staining.\n\nGram staining has been suggested to be as effective a diagnostic tool as PCR in one primary research report regarding gonococcal urethritis.\n\nGram stains are performed on body fluid or biopsy when infection is suspected. Gram stains yield results much more quickly than culturing, and is especially important when infection would make an important difference in the patient's treatment and prognosis; examples are cerebrospinal fluid for meningitis and synovial fluid for septic arthritis.\n\nGram-positive bacteria have a thick mesh-like cell wall made of peptidoglycan (50–90% of cell envelope), and as a result are stained purple by crystal violet, whereas gram-negative bacteria have a thinner layer (10% of cell envelope), so do not retain the purple stain and are counter-stained pink by safranin. There are four basic steps of the Gram stain:\n\nCrystal violet (CV) dissociates in aqueous solutions into and chloride () ions. These ions penetrate through the cell wall and cell membrane of both gram-positive and gram-negative cells. The ion interacts with negatively charged components of bacterial cells and stains the cells purple.\n\nIodide ( or ) interacts with and forms large complexes of crystal violet and iodine (CV–I) within the inner and outer layers of the cell. Iodine is often referred to as a mordant, but is a trapping agent that prevents the removal of the CV–I complex and, therefore, color the cell.\n\nWhen a decolorizer such as alcohol or acetone is added, it interacts with the lipids of the cell membrane. A gram-negative cell loses its outer lipopolysaccharide membrane, and the inner peptidoglycan layer is left exposed. The CV–I complexes are washed from the gram-negative cell along with the outer membrane. In contrast, a gram-positive cell becomes dehydrated from an ethanol treatment. The large CV–I complexes become trapped within the gram-positive cell due to the multilayered nature of its peptidoglycan. The decolorization step is critical and must be timed correctly; the crystal violet stain is removed from both gram-positive and negative cells if the decolorizing agent is left on too long (a matter of seconds).\n\nAfter decolorization, the gram-positive cell remains purple and the gram-negative cell loses its purple color. Counterstain, which is usually positively charged safranin or basic fuchsine, is applied last to give decolorized gram-negative bacteria a pink or red color.\n\nGram-positive bacteria generally have a single membrane (\"monoderm\") surrounded by a thick peptidoglycan.\nThis rule is followed by two phyla: \"Firmicutes\" (except for the classes Mollicutes and Negativicutes) and the \"Actinobacteria\". In contrast, members of the Chloroflexi (green non-sulfur bacteria) are monoderms but possess a thin or absent (class Dehalococcoidetes) peptidoglycan and can stain negative, positive or indeterminate; members of the Deinococcus-Thermus group, stain positive but are diderms with a thick peptidoglycan. \n\nHistorically, the gram-positive forms made up the phylum Firmicutes, a name now used for the largest group. It includes many well-known genera such as \"Bacillus\", \"Listeria\", \"Staphylococcus\", \"Streptococcus\", \"Enterococcus\", and \"Clostridium\". It has also been expanded to include the Mollicutes, bacteria like \"Mycoplasma\" that lack cell walls and so cannot be stained by Gram, but are derived from such forms.\n\nSome bacteria have cell walls which are particularly adept at retaining stains. These will appear positive by Gram stain even though they are not closely related to other gram-positive bacteria. These are called acid fast bacteria, and can only be differentiated from other gram-positive bacteria by special staining procedures.\n\nGram-negative bacteria generally possess a thin layer of peptidoglycan between two membranes (\"diderms\"). Most bacterial phyla are gram-negative, including the cyanobacteria, spirochaetes, and green sulfur bacteria, and most Proteobacteria (exceptions being some members of the \"Rickettsiales\" and the insect-endosymbionts of the \"Enterobacteriales\").\n\nSome bacteria, after staining with the Gram stain, yield a gram-variable pattern: a mix of pink and purple cells are seen. In cultures of Bacillus, Butyrivibrio, and Clostridium, a decrease in peptidoglycan thickness during growth coincides with an increase in the number of cells that stain gram-negative. In addition, in all bacteria stained using the Gram stain, the age of the culture may influence the results of the stain.\n\nGram-indeterminate bacteria do not respond predictably to Gram staining and, therefore, cannot be determined as either gram-positive or gram-negative. Examples include many species of \"Mycobacterium\", including \"M. tuberculosis\" and \"M. leprae\".\n\nThe term Gram staining is derived from the surname of Hans Christian Gram, the eponym (Gram) is therefore capitalized but not the common noun (stain) as is usual for scientific terms. The adjectives 'gram-positive' and 'gram-negative'; as eponymous adjectives, their initial letter can be either lowercase 'g' or capital 'G', depending on whose style guide (if any) governs the document being written. Lowercase style is used by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and other style regimens such as the AMA style. Dictionaries may use lowercase, uppercase, or both. Uppercase 'Gram-positive' or 'Gram-negative' usage is also common in many scientific journal articles and publications. When articles are submitted to journals, each journal may or may not apply house style to the postprint version. Preprint versions contain whichever style the author happened to use. Even style regimens that use lowercase for the adjectives 'gram-positive' and 'gram-negative' still use capital for 'Gram stain'.\n\n\n", "id": "12935", "title": "Gram staining"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12936", "text": "Gram-positive bacteria\n\nGram-positive bacteria are bacteria that give a positive result in the Gram stain test. Gram-positive bacteria take up the crystal violet stain used in the test, and then appear to be purple-coloured when seen through a microscope. This is because the thick peptidoglycan layer in the bacterial cell wall retains the stain after it is washed away from the rest of the sample, in the decolorization stage of the test.\n\nGram-negative bacteria cannot retain the violet stain after the decolorization step; alcohol used in this stage degrades the outer membrane of gram-negative cells making the cell wall more porous and incapable of retaining the crystal violet stain. Their peptidoglycan layer is much thinner and sandwiched between an inner cell membrane and a bacterial outer membrane, causing them to take up the counterstain (safranin or fuchsine) and appear red or pink.\n\nDespite their thicker peptidoglycan layer, gram-positive bacteria are more receptive to antibiotics than gram-negative, due to the absence of the outer membrane.\n\nIn general, the following characteristics are present in gram-positive bacteria:\n\n\nOnly some species have a capsule usually consisting of polysaccharides. Also only some species are flagellates, and when they do have flagella they only have two basal body rings to support them (gram-negative have four). Both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria commonly have a surface layer called an S-layer. In gram-positive bacteria, the S-layer is attached to the peptidoglycan layer (in gram-negative bacteria, the S-layer is attached directly to the outer membrane). Specific to gram-positive bacteria is the presence of teichoic acids in the cell wall. Some of these are lipoteichoic acids, which have a lipid component in the cell membrane that can assist in anchoring the peptidoglycan.\n\nAlong with cell shape, Gram staining is a rapid method used to differentiate bacterial species. Such staining, together with growth requirement and antibiotic susceptibility testing, and other macroscopic and physiologic tests, forms the full basis for classification and subdivision of the bacteria (e.g., see figure and pre-1990 versions of \"Bergey's Manual\").\n\nHistorically, the kingdom Monera was divided into four divisions based primarily on Gram staining: Firmicutes (positive in staining), Gracilicutes (negative in staining), Mollicutes (neutral in staining) and Mendocutes (variable in staining). Based on 16S ribosomal RNA phylogenetic studies of the late microbiologist Carl Woese and collaborators and colleagues at the University of Illinois, the monophyly of the gram-positive bacteria was challenged, with major implications for the therapeutic and general study of these organisms. Based on molecular studies of the 16S sequences, Woese recognised twelve bacterial phyla. Two of these were both gram-positive and were divided on the proportion of the guanine and cytosine content in their DNA. The high G + C phylum was made up of the Actinobacteria and the low G + C phylum contained the Firmicutes. The Actinobacteria include the \"Corynebacterium\", \"Mycobacterium\", \"Nocardia\" and \"Streptomyces\" genera. The (low G + C) Firmicutes, have a 45–60% GC content, but this is lower than that of the Actinobacteria.\n\nAlthough bacteria are traditionally divided into two main groups, gram-positive and gram-negative, based on their Gram stain retention property, this classification system is ambiguous as it refers to three distinct aspects (staining result, envelope organization, taxonomic group), which do not necessarily coalesce for some bacterial species. The gram-positive and gram-negative staining response is also not a reliable characteristic as these two kinds of bacteria do not form phylogenetic coherent groups. However, although Gram staining response is an empirical criterion, its basis lies in the marked differences in the ultrastructure and chemical composition of the bacterial cell wall, marked by the absence or presence of an outer lipid membrane.\n\nAll gram-positive bacteria are bounded by a single-unit lipid membrane, and, in general, they contain a thick layer (20–80 nm) of peptidoglycan responsible for retaining the Gram stain. A number of other bacteria—that are bounded by a single membrane, but stain Gram-negative due to either lack of the peptidoglycan layer, as in the Mycoplasmas, or their inability to retain the Gram stain because of their cell wall composition—also show close relationship to the Gram-positive bacteria. For the bacterial cells bounded by a single cell membrane, the term \"monoderm bacteria\" or \"monoderm prokaryotes\" has been proposed.\n\nIn contrast to gram-positive bacteria, all archetypical gram-negative bacteria are bounded by a cytoplasmic membrane and an outer cell membrane; they contain only a thin layer of peptidoglycan (2–3 nm) between these membranes. The presence of inner and outer cell membranes defines a new compartment in these cells: the periplasmic space or the periplasmic compartment. These bacteria have been designated as \"diderm bacteria.\" The distinction between the monoderm and diderm bacteria is supported by conserved signature indels in a number of important proteins (viz. DnaK, GroEL). Of these two structurally distinct groups of bacteria, monoderms are indicated to be ancestral. Based upon a number of observations including that the gram-positive bacteria are the major producers of antibiotics and that, in general, gram-negative bacteria are resistant to them, it has been proposed that the outer cell membrane in gram-negative bacteria (diderms) has evolved as a protective mechanism against antibiotic selection pressure. Some bacteria, such as \"Deinococcus\", which stain gram-positive due to the presence of a thick peptidoglycan layer and also possess an outer cell membrane are suggested as intermediates in the transition between monoderm (gram-positive) and diderm (gram-negative) bacteria. The diderm bacteria can also be further differentiated between simple diderms lacking lipopolysaccharide, the archetypical diderm bacteria where the outer cell membrane contains lipopolysaccharide, and the diderm bacteria where outer cell membrane is made up of mycolic acid.\n\nIn general, gram-positive bacteria are monoderms and have a single lipid bilayer whereas gram-negative bacteria are diderms and have two bilayers. Some taxa lack peptidoglycan (such as the domain Archaea, the class Mollicutes, some members of the Rickettsiales, and the insect-endosymbionts of the Enterobacteriales) and are gram-variable. This, however, does not always hold true. The \"Deinococcus-Thermus\" bacteria have gram-positive stains, although they are structurally similar to gram-negative bacteria with two layers. The Chloroflexi have a single layer, yet (with some exceptions) stain negative. Two related phyla to the Chloroflexi, the TM7 clade and the Ktedonobacteria, are also monoderms.\n\nSome Firmicute species are not gram-positive. These belong to the class Mollicutes (alternatively considered a class of the phylum Tenericutes), which lack peptidoglycan (gram-indeterminate), and the class Negativicutes, which includes Selenomonas and stain gram-negative. Additionally, a number of bacterial taxa (viz. Negativicutes, Fusobacteria, Synergistetes, and Elusimicrobia) that are either part of the phylum Firmicutes or branch in its proximity are found to possess a diderm cell structure. However, a conserved signature indel (CSI) in the HSP60 (GroEL) protein distinguishes all traditional phyla of gram-negative bacteria (e.g., Proteobacteria, Aquificae, Chlamydiae, Bacteroidetes, Chlorobi, Cyanobacteria, Fibrobacteres, Verrucomicrobia, Planctomycetes, Spirochetes, Acidobacteria, etc.) from these other atypical diderm bacteria, as well as other phyla of monoderm bacteria (e.g., Actinobacteria, Firmicutes, Thermotogae, Chloroflexi, etc.). The presence of this CSI in all sequenced species of conventional LPS (lipopolysaccharide)-containing gram-negative bacterial phyla provides evidence that these phyla of bacteria form a monophyletic clade and that no loss of the outer membrane from any species from this group has occurred.\n\nIn the classical sense, six gram-positive genera are typically pathogenic in humans. Two of these, \"Streptococcus\" and \"Staphylococcus\", are cocci (sphere-shaped). The remaining organisms are bacilli (rod-shaped) and can be subdivided based on their ability to form spores. The non-spore formers are \"Corynebacterium\" and \"Listeria\" (a coccobacillus), whereas \"Bacillus\" and \"Clostridium\" produce spores. The spore-forming bacteria can again be divided based on their respiration: \"Bacillus\" is a facultative anaerobe, while \"Clostridium\" is an obligate anaerobe. Also, \"Rathybacter\", \"Leifsonia\", and \"Clavibacter\" are three gram-positive genera that cause plant disease. Gram-positive bacteria are capable of causing serious and sometimes fatal infections in newborn infants.\n\nTransformation is one of three processes for horizontal gene transfer, in which exogenous genetic material passes from bacterium to another, the other two being conjugation (transfer of genetic material between two bacterial cells in direct contact) and transduction (injection of foreign DNA by a bacteriophage virus into the host bacterium). In transformation, the genetic material passes through the intervening medium, and uptake is completely dependent on the recipient bacterium.\n\nAs of 2014 about 80 species of bacteria were known to be capable of transformation, about evenly divided between Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria; the number might be an overestimate since several of the reports are supported by single papers. Transformation among gram-positive bacteria has been studied in medically important species such as \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\", \"Streptococcus mutans\", \"Staphylococcus aureus\" and \"Streptococcus sanguinis\" and in gram-positive soil bacterium \"Bacillus subtilis\".\n\nThe adjectives 'gram-positive' and 'gram-negative' derive from the surname of Hans Christian Gram; as eponymous adjectives, their initial letter can be either lowercase 'g' or capital 'G', depending on whether or not a style guide (for example that of the CDC) governs the document being written. This is further explained at \"Gram staining § Orthographic note\".\n\n", "id": "12936", "title": "Gram-positive bacteria"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12937", "text": "Gram-negative bacteria\n\nGram-negative bacteria are a group of bacteria that do not retain the crystal violet stain used in the Gram staining method of bacterial differentiation. They are characterized by their cell envelopes, which are composed of a thin peptidoglycan cell wall sandwiched between an inner cytoplasmic cell membrane and a bacterial outer membrane.\n\nGram-negative bacteria are spread worldwide, in virtually all environments that support life. The gram-negative bacteria include the model organism \"Escherichia coli\", as well as many pathogenic bacteria, such as \"Pseudomonas aeruginosa\", \"Neisseria gonorrhoeae\", Chlamydia trachomatis, and \"Yersinia pestis\". Several classes of antibiotics target gram-negative bacteria specifically, including aminoglycosides and carbapenems.\n\nGram-negative bacteria display :\n\n\nAlong with cell shape, Gram staining is a rapid diagnostic tool and once was used to group species at the subdivision of Bacteria.\nHistorically, the kingdom Monera was divided into four divisions based on Gram staining: Firmacutes (+), Gracillicutes (−), Mollicutes (0) and Mendocutes (var.).\nSince 1987, the monophyly of the gram-negative bacteria has been disproven with molecular studies. However some authors, such as Cavalier-Smith still treat them as a monophyletic taxon (though not a clade; his definition of monophyly requires a single common ancestor but does not require holophyly, the property that all descendents be encompassed by the taxon) and refer to the group as subkingdom \"Negibacteria\".\n\nBacteria are traditionally divided into the two groups: gram-positive and gram-negative, based on their Gram stain retention. These groups are often thought of as lineages, with gram-negative bacteria more closely-related to one another than to gram-positive bacteria. While this is often true, the classification system breaks down in some cases. A given bacteria's Gram stain result, bacterial membrane organization, and lineage groupings do not always match up. As such, the Gram stain cannot be reliably used to assess familial relationships of bacteria. That said, Gram staining does often give reliable information about the composition of the cell membrane, distinguishing between the presence or absence of an outer lipid membrane.\n\nOf these two structurally distinct groups of prokaryotic organisms, monoderm prokaryotes are indicated to be ancestral. Based upon a number of different observations including that the gram-positive bacteria are the major reactors to antibiotics and that gram-negative bacteria are, in general, resistant to them, it has been proposed that the outer cell membrane in gram-negative bacteria (diderms) evolved as a protective mechanism against antibiotic selection pressure. Some bacteria such as Deinococcus, which stain gram-positive due to the presence of a thick peptidoglycan layer, but also possess an outer cell membrane are suggested as intermediates in the transition between monoderm (gram-positive) and diderm (gram-negative) bacteria. The diderm bacteria can also be further differentiated between simple diderms lacking lipopolysaccharide; the archetypical diderm bacteria, in which the outer cell membrane contains lipopolysaccharide; and the diderm bacteria, in which the outer cell membrane is made up of mycolic acid (e. g. Mycobacterium).\n\nIn addition, a number of bacterial taxa (viz. Negativicutes, Fusobacteria, Synergistetes, and Elusimicrobia) that are either part of the phylum Firmicutes or branches in its proximity are also found to possess a diderm cell structure. However, a conserved signature indel (CSI) in the HSP60 (GroEL) protein distinguishes all traditional phyla of gram-negative bacteria (e.g., Proteobacteria, Aquificae, Chlamydiae, Bacteroidetes, Chlorobi, Cyanobacteria, Fibrobacteres, Verrucomicrobia, Planctomycetes, Spirochetes, Acidobacteria) from these other atypical diderm bacteria as well as other phyla of monoderm bacteria (e.g., Actinobacteria, Firmicutes, Thermotogae, Chloroflexi). The presence of this CSI in all sequenced species of conventional lipopolysaccharide-containing gram-negative bacterial phyla provides evidence that these phyla of bacteria form a monophyletic clade and that no loss of the outer membrane from any species from this group has occurred.\n\nThe proteobacteria are a major group of gram-negative bacteria, including \"Escherichia coli\" (\"E. coli\"), \"Salmonella\", \"Shigella\", and other Enterobacteriaceae, \"Pseudomonas\", \"Moraxella\", \"Helicobacter\", \"Stenotrophomonas\", \"Bdellovibrio\", acetic acid bacteria, \"Legionella\" etc. Other notable groups of gram-negative bacteria include the cyanobacteria, spirochaetes, green sulfur, and green non-sulfur bacteria.\n\nMedically relevant gram-negative cocci include the four types that cause a sexually transmitted disease (\"Neisseria gonorrhoeae\"), a meningitis (\"Neisseria meningitidis\"), and respiratory symptoms (\"Moraxella catarrhalis\", \"Haemophilus influenzae\").\n\nMedically relevant gram-negative bacilli include a multitude of species. Some of them cause primarily respiratory problems (\"Klebsiella pneumoniae\", \"Legionella pneumophila\", \"Pseudomonas aeruginosa\"), primarily urinary problems (\"Escherichia coli\", \"Proteus mirabilis\", \"Enterobacter cloacae\", \"Serratia marcescens\"), and primarily gastrointestinal problems (\"Helicobacter pylori\", \"Salmonella enteritidis\", \"Salmonella typhi\").\n\nGram-negative bacteria associated with hospital-acquired infections include \"Acinetobacter baumannii\", which cause bacteremia, secondary meningitis, and ventilator-associated pneumonia in hospital intensive-care units.\n\nTransformation is one of three processes for horizontal gene transfer, in which exogenous genetic material passes from bacterium to another, the other two being conjugation (transfer of genetic material between two bacterial cells in direct contact) and transduction (injection of foreign DNA by a bacteriophage virus into the host bacterium). In transformation, the genetic material passes through the intervening medium, and uptake is completely dependent on the recipient bacterium.\n\nAs of 2014 about 80 species of bacteria were known to be capable of transformation, about evenly divided between Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria; the number might be an overestimate since several of the reports are supported by single papers. Transformation has been studied in medically important Gram-negative bacteria species such as \"Helicobacter pylori\", \"Legionella pneumophila\", \"Neisseria meningitidis\", \"Neisseria gonorrhoeae\", \"Haemophilus influenzae\" and \"Vibrio cholerae\". It has also been studied in gram-negative species found in soil such as \"Pseudomonas stutzeri\", \"Acinetobacter baylyi\", and gram-negative plant pathogens such as \"Ralstonia solanacearum\" and \"Xylella fastidiosa\".\n\nOne of the several unique characteristics of gram-negative bacteria is the structure of the bacterial outer membrane. The outer leaflet of this membrane comprises a complex lipopolysaccharide (LPS) whose lipid portion acts as an endotoxin. If gram-negative bacteria enter the circulatory system, the liposaccharide can cause a toxic reaction. This results in fever, an increased respiratory rate, and low blood pressure. This may lead to life-threatening condition of endotoxic shock.\n\nThe outer membrane protects the bacteria from several antibiotics, dyes, and detergents that would normally damage either the inner membrane or the cell wall (made of peptidoglycan). The outer membrane provides these bacteria with resistance to lysozyme and penicillin. However, alternative medicinal treatments such as lysozyme with EDTA and the antibiotic ampicillin have been developed to combat the protective outer membrane of some pathogenic gram-negative organisms. Other drugs can also be used, significant ones being chloramphenicol, streptomycin, and nalidixic acid. Chloramphenicol is rarely used in the EU due to the association with drug induced pancytopenia.\n\nThe pathogenic capability of gram-negative bacteria is often associated with certain components of their membrane, in particular, the LPS. In humans, the presence of LPS triggers an innate immune response, activating the immune system and producing cytokines (hormonal regulators). Inflammation is a common reaction to cytokine production, which can also produce host toxicity. The innate immune response to LPS, however, is not synonymous with pathogenicity, or the ability to cause disease.\n\nThe adjectives 'gram-positive' and 'gram-negative' derive from the surname of Hans Christian Gram; as eponymous adjectives, their initial letter can be either lowercase 'g' or capital 'G', depending on whose style guide (if any) governs the document being written. This is further explained at \"Gram staining § Orthographic note\".\n\n\n", "id": "12937", "title": "Gram-negative bacteria"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12938", "text": "Greyhound\n\nThe Greyhound is a breed of dog, a sighthound which has been bred for coursing game and Greyhound racing. Since the rise in large-scale adoption of retired racing Greyhounds, it has seen a resurgence in popularity as a family pet.\n\nAccording to Merriam-Webster, a Greyhound is \"any of a breed of tall slender graceful smooth-coated dogs characterized by swiftness and keen sight...of several related dogs.\"\n\nIt is a gentle and intelligent breed whose combination of long, powerful legs, deep chest, flexible spine and slim build allows it to reach average race speeds in excess of . The Greyhound can reach a full speed of within or six strides from the boxes, traveling at almost for the first of a race.\n\nMales are usually tall at the withers and weigh around . Females tend to be smaller with shoulder heights ranging from and weights from less than . Greyhounds have very short fur, which is easy to maintain. There are approximately thirty recognized colour forms, of which variations of white, brindle, fawn, black, red and blue (gray) can appear uniquely or in combination. Greyhounds are dolichocephalic, with a skull which is relatively long in comparison to its breadth, and an elongated muzzle.\n\nGreyhounds can be aloof and indifferent to strangers, but are affectionate with their own pack. They are generally docile, lazy, easy-going, and calm.\n\nGreyhounds wear muzzles during racing, which can lead some to believe it is an aggressive dog, but this is not true. Muzzles are worn to prevent injuries resulting from dogs nipping one another during or immediately after a race, when the 'hare' has disappeared out of sight and the dogs are no longer racing but remain excited. \n\nContrary to popular belief, adult Greyhounds do not need extended periods of daily exercise, as they are bred for sprinting rather than endurance. Greyhound puppies that have not been taught how to utilize their energy, however, can be hyperactive and destructive if not given an outlet, and they require more experienced handlers.\n\nGreyhound owners and adoption groups consider Greyhounds to be wonderful pets. Greyhounds are quiet, gentle, and loyal to owners. They are very loving creatures, and they enjoy the company of their humans and other dogs. Whether a Greyhound enjoys the company of other small animals or cats depends on the individual dog's personality. Greyhounds will typically chase small animals; those lacking a high 'prey drive' will be able to coexist happily with toy dog breeds and/or cats. Many owners describe their Greyhounds as \"45-mile-per-hour couch potatoes\".\n\nGreyhounds live most happily as pets in quiet environments. They do well in families with children as long as the children are taught to treat the dog properly and with politeness and appropriate respect. Greyhounds have a sensitive nature, and gentle commands work best as training methods.\n\nGreyhounds cope well as three-legged dogs.\n\nOccasionally, a Greyhound may bark; however, Greyhounds are generally not barkers, which is beneficial in suburban environments, and they are usually as friendly to strangers as they are with their own family.\n\nA very common misconception regarding Greyhounds is that they are hyperactive. In retired racing Greyhounds, this is usually not the case. Greyhounds can live comfortably as apartment dogs, as they do not require much space and sleep close to 18 hours per day. In fact, due to their calm temperament, Greyhounds can make better \"apartment dogs\" than smaller, more active breeds.\n\nAt most race tracks, Greyhounds are housed in crates for sleeping. Most such animals know no other way of life than to remain in a crate the majority of the day. Crate training a retired Greyhound in a home is therefore generally extremely easy.\n\nMany Greyhound adoption groups recommend that owners keep their Greyhounds on a leash whenever outdoors, except in fully enclosed areas. This is due to their prey-drive, their speed, and the assertion that Greyhounds have no road sense. In some jurisdictions, it is illegal for Greyhounds to be allowed off-lead even in off-lead dog parks, so it is important to be familiar with the relevant local laws and regulations. Due to their size and strength, adoption groups recommend that fences be between 4 and 6 feet, to prevent them from jumping out.\n\nThe original primary use of Greyhounds, both in the British Isles and on the Continent of Europe, was in the coursing of deer. Later, they specialized in competition hare coursing. Some Greyhounds today are still used for coursing, although artificial lure sports like lure coursing and racing are far more common and popular. Many breeders argue that coursing is still important. This is the case particularly in Ireland, where many of the world’s leading breeders are based. A bloodline that has produced a champion on the live hare coursing field is often crossed with track lines in order to keep the early pace (e.g. speed over first 100 yards), which Greyhounds are renowned for, prominent in the line. Many of the leading sprinters over 300 yards to 550 yards have bloodlines traceable back through Irish sires within a few generations that won events such as the Irish Coursing Derby or the Irish Cup.\nThe majority of pure-bred Greyhounds are whelped in Ireland. Researching via Greyhound data websites will note coursing champions within a few generations in the pedigree of track racing champions.\n\nUntil the early twentieth century, Greyhounds were principally bred and trained for hunting and coursing. During the 1920s, modern greyhound racing was introduced into the United States and England (Belle Vue Stadium, Manchester, July 1926), as well as Northern Ireland (Celtic Park (Belfast), April 1927) and the Republic of Ireland (Shelbourne Park, Dublin). \n\nAustralia also has a significant racing culture. However, the 2015 live baiting scandal and adverse media coverage led to a Special Commission of Inquiry into the Greyhound Racing Industry in NSW. On 7 July 2016, New South Wales Premier Mike Baird announced that greyhound racing was to be banned in the state from 1 July 2017 after the inquiry found evidence of systemic animal cruelty, including mass greyhound killings and live baiting, however the plan for the ban was later reversed before it was implemented. After the NSW announcement to ban racing, Australian Capital Territory (ACT) Chief Minister Andrew Barr stated that greyhound racing would be banned in the ACT.\n\nAside from professional racing, many Greyhounds enjoy success on the amateur race track. Organizations like the Large Gazehound Racing Association (LGRA) and the National Oval Track Racing Association (NOTRA) provide opportunities for Greyhounds and other sighthound breeds to compete in amateur racing events all over the United States.\n\nGreyhounds can squeeze into extremely narrow spaces and are exceptional jumpers.\n\nHistorically, the Greyhound has, since its first appearance as a hunting type and breed, enjoyed a specific degree of fame and definition in Western literature, heraldry and art as the most elegant or noble companion and hunter of the canine world. In modern times, the professional racing industry with its large numbers of track-bred Greyhounds, as well as the international adoption programs aimed at rescuing and re-homing dogs surplus to the industry, have redefined the breed in their almost mutually dependent pursuit of its welfare, as a sporting dog that will supply friendly companionship in its retirement. Outside the racing industry and coursing community, the Kennel Clubs' registered breed still enjoys a modest following as a show dog and pet. There is an emerging pattern visible in recent years (2009–2010) of a significant decline in track betting and multiple track closures in the US, which will have consequences for the origin of future companion Greyhounds and the re-homing of current ex-racers.\n\nGreyhounds are typically a healthy and long-lived breed, and hereditary illness is rare. Some Greyhounds have been known to develop esophageal achalasia, bloat (gastric torsion), and osteosarcoma. If exposed to \"E. coli\", they may develop Alabama rot. Because the Greyhound's lean physique makes it ill-suited to sleeping on hard surfaces, owners of both racing and companion Greyhounds generally provide soft bedding; without bedding, Greyhounds are prone to develop painful skin sores. The average Greyhound lifespan is 9 to 11 years.\n\nDue to the Greyhound's unique physiology and anatomy, a veterinarian who understands the issues relevant to the breed is generally needed when the dogs need treatment, particularly when anesthesia is required. Greyhounds cannot metabolize barbiturate-based anesthesia as other breeds can because they have lower amounts of oxidative enzymes in their livers. Greyhounds demonstrate unusual blood chemistry , which can be misread by veterinarians not familiar with the breed; this can result in an incorrect diagnosis.\n\nGreyhounds are very sensitive to insecticides. Many vets do not recommend the use of flea collars or flea spray on Greyhounds if it is a pyrethrin-based product. Products like Advantage, Frontline, Lufenuron, and Amitraz are safe for use on Greyhounds and are very effective in controlling fleas and ticks.\n\nGreyhounds also have higher levels of red blood cells than other breeds. Since red blood cells carry oxygen to the muscles, this higher level allows the hound to move larger quantities of oxygen faster from the lungs to the muscles. Conversely, Greyhounds have lower levels of platelets than other breeds. Veterinary blood services often use Greyhounds as universal blood donors.\n\nGreyhounds do not have undercoats and thus are less likely to trigger dog allergies in humans (they are sometimes incorrectly referred to as \"hypoallergenic\"). The lack of an undercoat, coupled with a general lack of body fat, also makes Greyhounds more susceptible to extreme temperatures (both hot and cold); because of this, they must be housed inside.\n\nThe key to the speed of a Greyhound can be found in its light but muscular build, large heart, and highest percentage of fast-twitch muscle of any breed, the double suspension gallop and the extreme flexibility of the spine. \"Double suspension rotary gallop\" describes the fastest running gait of the Greyhound in which all four feet are free from the ground in two phases, contracted and extended, during each full stride.\n\nThe breed's origin has in popular literature often romantically been connected to Ancient Egypt, in which it is believed \"that the breed dates back about 4,000 years \" a belief for which there is no scientific evidence. While similar in appearance to Saluki (Persian Greyhound) or Sloughi (tombs at Beni Hassan c. 2000 BC), analyses of DNA reported in 2004 suggest that the Greyhound may not be closely related to these breeds, but is a close relative to herding dogs. Historical literature on the first sighthound in Europe (Arrian), the \"vertragus\", the probable antecedent of the Greyhound, suggests that the origin is with the ancient Celts from Eastern Europe or Eurasia. Greyhound-type dogs of small, medium, and large size, would appear to have been bred across Europe since that time. All modern, pure-bred pedigree Greyhounds are derived from the Greyhound stock recorded and registered, firstly in the private 18th century, then public 19th century studbooks, which ultimately were registered with coursing, racing, and kennel club authorities of the United Kingdom.\n\nHistorically, these sighthounds were used primarily for hunting in the open where their keen eyesight is valuable. It is believed that they (or at least similarly named dogs) were introduced to the British Isles in the 5th and 6th century BC from Celtic mainland Europe, although the Picts and other peoples of the northern British Isles (modern Scotland) were believed to have had large hounds similar to that of the deerhound before the 6th century BC.\n\nThe name \"Greyhound\" is generally believed to come from the Old English \"grighund\". \"Hund\" is the antecedent of the modern \"hound\", but the meaning of \"grig\" is undetermined, other than in reference to dogs in Old English and Old Norse. Its origin does not appear to have any common root with the modern word \"grey\" for color, and indeed the Greyhound is seen with a wide variety of coat colors. The lighter colors, patch-like markings and white appeared in the breed that was once ordinarily grey in color. The Greyhound is the only dog mentioned by name in the Bible; many versions, including the King James version, name the Greyhound as one of the \"four things stately\" in the Proverbs. However, some newer biblical translations, including The New International Version, have changed this to \"strutting rooster\", which appears to be an alternative translation of the Hebrew term \"mothen zarzir\". But also the Douay–Rheims Bible translation from the late 4th-century Latin Vulgate into English translates it as \"a cock.\"\n\nAccording to Pokorny the English name \"Greyhound\" does not mean \"grey dog/hound\", but simply \"fair dog\". Subsequent words have been derived from the Proto-Indo-European root *g'her- \"shine, twinkle\": English \"grey\", Old High German \"gris\" \"grey, old\", Old Icelandic \"griss\" \"piglet, pig\", Old Icelandic \"gryja\" \"to dawn\", \"gryjandi\" \"morning twilight\", Old Irish \"grian\" \"sun\", Old Church Slavonic \"zorja\" \"morning twilight, brightness\". The common sense of these words is \"to shine; bright\".\n\nIn 1928, the very first winner of Best in Show at Crufts was Primley Sceptre, a Greyhound owned by H. Whitley.\n\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "12938", "title": "Greyhound"}
