{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13055", "text": "Galeon\n\nGaleon is a discontinued Gecko-based web browser that was created by Marco Pesenti Gritti with the goal of delivering a consistent browsing experience to GNOME desktop environment. It gained some popularity in the early 2000s due to its speed, flexibility in configuration and features.\n\nThe disagreement over the future of Galeon split the development team in 2002, which resulted in departure of browser's initial author and several other developers. This event marked the beginning of the browser's popularity decline, which led to its discontinuation in September 2008. Some of Galeon's features were subsequently ported to Epiphany (now called Web) – the descendant of Galeon.\n\nGaleon made use of Gecko's features including configuration options and standards support. Apart from that, Galeon had several features that were uncommon in browsers at that time:\n\nThe project was started by Marco Pesenti Gritti with the goal of creating a web browser that would be fast and consistent with the GNOME desktop environment. The first public version (Galeon 0.6) was released in June 2000.\n\nThe first releases of Galeon were criticised for lack of such basic features as cookie and proxy support, though the browser added some features with every release. Version 1.2 of Galeon introduced many new features that drew attention of the general public.\n\nAt the time of Galeon's creation, the most popular Linux browsers, including Netscape and Mozilla, were large multi-functional programs. This made them slow to start and often impractical due to their high memory usage and processor requirements. Opera was somewhat faster, but it was proprietary software distributed in trialware and adware versions, both of which lacked some of the functionality of the Microsoft Windows version.\n\nGaleon was widely seen as one of the best Linux browsers available. The polls revealed the substantial usage share of Galeon, though its popularity was regarded as owing to lack of stability evident in Mozilla's browsers.\n\nWith the release of new version of the GTK+ widget toolkit, which was used to construct the user interface of Galeon, the team decided to write a new version of Galeon from scratch. At the same time the GNOME project has adopted its new human interface guidelines, which promoted simplicity and uniform design. The Galeon team had differing opinions on the new guidelines. The author and lead developer, Marco Pesenti Gritti, endorsed them and saw the rewrite as an opportunity to make Galeon simpler. Many other developers believed that reducing the number of preferences and simplifying the user interface would harm the project.\n\nIn November 2002, as the result of several discussions on the topic Gritti made the decision to cease his work in Galeon and fork the project and started development of a HIG-compliant web browser he called \"Epiphany\" (now known as Web).\n\nAs Gritti no longer controlled the development of Galeon, the previous functionality was restored in subsequent releases and some new features were added, though development got slow after the split. At the same time the rising popularity of Firefox, its status of the default browser in major distribution and the overwhelming number of its extensions led to decline of Galeon's user base.\n\nEventually the Galeon developers announced plans to halt development of Galeon, saying \"the current approach is unsustainable\" regarding the resources required to maintain it. Instead, they planned to develop a set of extensions for Epiphany to provide similar functionality.\n\nEven after development ceased in September 2008, the browser remained popular and in December 2011 was still available in some Linux distribution's repositories, such as Debian 6 Squeeze, although it was not part of Debian 7 Wheezy.\n\nGaleon was praised for its customizability and speed, as compared to Netscape Navigator and Firefox, though Konqueror and Opera were still faster on older hardware. Galeon was noted for its session handling and crash recovery.\n\nIn November 2002, OSNews conducted a poll to determine the most popular Gecko-based browser, which included several browsers for Microsoft Windows, Mac OS X and Linux, but didn't include Netscape Navigator and Mozilla Suite. The Linux-only Galeon was the second most popular, after cross-platform Firefox, at that time known as Phoenix.\n\nCritics noted Galeon's tricky plugin installation.\n", "id": "13055", "title": "Galeon"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13057", "text": "Gatling gun\n\nThe Gatling gun is one of the best-known early rapid-fire spring loaded, hand cranked weapons and a forerunner of the modern machine gun. Invented by Richard Gatling, it is known for its use by the Union forces during the American Civil War in the 1860s, which was the first time it was employed in combat. Later, it was used again in numerous military conflicts, such as the Boshin War, the Anglo-Zulu War, and the assault on San Juan Hill during the Spanish–American War. It was also used by militias and the National Guard in episodes of the Great Railroad Strike of 1877, specifically in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.\n\nThe Gatling gun's operation centered on a cyclic multi-barrel design which facilitated cooling and synchronized the firing-reloading sequence. Each barrel fired a single shot when it reached a certain point in the cycle, after which it ejected the spent cartridge, loaded a new round, and, in the process, allowed the barrel to cool somewhat. This configuration allowed higher rates of fire to be achieved without the barrels overheating.\n\nThe Gatling gun was designed by the American inventor Dr. Richard J. Gatling in 1861 and patented on November 4, 1862. Gatling wrote that he created it to reduce the size of armies and so reduce the number of deaths by combat and disease, and to show how futile war is.\n\nAlthough the first Gatling gun was capable of firing continuously, it required a person to crank it; therefore it was not a true automatic weapon. The Maxim gun, invented and patented in 1883, was the first true fully automatic weapon, making use of the fired projectile's recoil force to reload the weapon. Nonetheless, the Gatling gun represented a huge leap in firearm technology.\n\nPrior to the Gatling gun, the only weapons available to military forces capable of firing many projectiles in a short space of time were mass-firing volley weapons, like the Belgian and French mitrailleuse of the 1860s and 1870s, and field cannons firing canister shot, much like an upsized shotgun. The latter were widely used during and after the Napoleonic Wars. Although the maximum rate of fire was increased by firing multiple projectiles simultaneously, these weapons still needed to be reloaded after each discharge, which for multi-barrel systems like the \"mitrailleuse\" was cumbersome and time-consuming. This negated much of the advantage of their high rate of fire per discharge, making them much less powerful on the battlefield. In comparison, the Gatling gun offered a rapid and continuous rate of fire without having to be manually reloaded by opening the breech.\n\nThe original Gatling gun was a field weapon which used multiple rotating barrels turned by a hand crank, and firing loose (no links or belt) metal cartridge ammunition using a gravity feed system from a hopper. The Gatling gun's innovation lay in the use of multiple barrels to limit overheating, a rotating mechanism, and a gravity-feed reloading system, which allowed unskilled operators to achieve a relatively high rate of fire of 200 rounds per minute.\n\nThe US Army adopted Gatling guns in several calibers, including .42 caliber, .45-70, .50 caliber, 1 inch, and (M1893 and later) .30 Army, with conversions of M1900 weapons to .30-03 and .30-06. The .45-70 weapon was also mounted on some US Navy ships of the 1880s and 1890s.\n\nThe Gatling gun was first used in warfare during the American Civil War. Twelve of the guns were purchased personally by Union commanders and used in the trenches during the siege of Petersburg, Virginia (June 1864 – April 1865). Eight other Gatling guns were fitted on gunboats. The gun was not accepted by the American Army until 1866, when a sales representative of the manufacturing company demonstrated it in combat.\n\nOn July 17, 1863, Gatling guns were purportedly used to New York anti-draft rioters. Two were brought by a National Guard unit from Philadelphia to use against strikers in Pittsburgh.\n\nGatling guns were famously \"not\" used at the Battle of the Little Bighorn, also known as \"Custer's Last Stand\", when Gen. George Armstrong Custer chose not to bring Gatlings with his main force.\n\nIn April 1867, a Gatling gun was purchased for the Argentine army by minister Domingo F. Sarmiento under instructions from president Bartolomé Mitre.\n\nCaptain Germán Astete of the Peruvian Navy took with him dozens of Gatling guns from the United States to Peru in December 1879 during the Peru-Chile War of the Pacific. Gatling guns were used by the Peruvian Navy and Army, especially in the Battle of Tacna (May 1880) and the Battle of San Juan (January 1881) against the invading Chilean Army.\n\nLieutenant A.L. Howard of the Connecticut National Guard had an interest in the company manufacturing Gatling guns, and took a personally owned Gatling gun to Saskatchewan, Canada, in 1885 for use with the Canadian military against Métis rebels during Louis Riel's North-West Rebellion.\n\nEarly multi-barrel guns were approximately the size and weight of artillery pieces, and were often perceived as a replacement for cannons firing grapeshot or canister shot. Gatling guns were even mounted aboard ships. Compared with earlier weapons such as the \"mitrailleuse,\" which required manual reloading, the Gatling gun was more reliable and easier to operate, and had a lower, but continuous rate of fire. The large wheels required to move these guns around required a high firing position, which increased the vulnerability of their crews.\n\nSustained firing of gunpowder cartridges generated a cloud of smoke, making concealment impossible until smokeless powder became available in the late 19th century. When operators were firing Gatling guns against troops of industrialized nations, they were at risk - vulnerable to artillery they could not reach and targeted by snipers they could not see.\n\nThe Gatling gun was used most successfully to expand European colonial empires by defeating indigenous warriors mounting massed attacks, including the Matabele, the Zulu, the Bedouin, and the Mahdists. Imperial Russia purchased 400 Gatling guns and used them against Turkmen cavalry and other nomads of central Asia. The Royal Navy used Gatling guns against the Egyptians at Alexandria in 1882.\n\nThe first use of the Gatling by the British Army was in the Afghan war at the Battle of Charasia in October 1879.\n\nBecause of infighting within army ordnance, Gatling guns were used by the U.S. Army during the Spanish–American War. A four-gun battery of Model 1895 ten-barrel Gatling guns in .30 Army, made by Colt's Arms Company, was formed into a separate detachment led by Lt. John \"Gatling Gun\" Parker. The detachment proved very effective, supporting the advance of American forces at the Battle of San Juan Hill. Three of the Gatlings with swivel mountings were used with great success against the Spanish defenders. During the American charge up San Juan and Kettle hills, the three guns fired a total of 18,000 .30 Army rounds in 8 1/2 minutes (an average of over 700 rounds per minute per gun) against Spanish troop positions along the crest of both hills, wreaking terrible carnage.\n\nDespite this remarkable achievement, the Gatling's weight and cumbersome artillery carriage hindered its ability to keep up with infantry forces over difficult ground, particularly in Cuba, where roads were often little more than jungle footpaths. By this time, the U.S. Marines had been issued the modern tripod-mounted M1895 Colt–Browning machine gun using the 6mm Lee Navy round, which they employed to defeat the Spanish infantry at the battle of Cuzco Wells.\n\nThe Gatling gun operated by a hand-crank mechanism, with six barrels revolving around a central shaft (although some models had as many as ten). Each barrel fires once per revolution at about the same position. The barrels, a carrier, and a lock cylinder were separate and all mounted on a solid plate revolving around a central shaft, mounted on an oblong fixed frame. Turning the crank rotated the shaft. The carrier was grooved and the lock cylinder was drilled with holes corresponding to the barrels.\n\nThe casing was partitioned, and through this opening the barrel shaft was journaled. In front of the casing was a cam with spiral surfaces. The cam imparted a reciprocating motion to the locks when the gun rotated. Also in the casing was a cocking ring with projections to cock and fire the gun. Each barrel had a single lock, working in the lock cylinder on a line with the barrel. The lock cylinder was encased and joined to the frame. Early models had a fibrous matting stuffed in among the barrels, which could be soaked with water to cool the barrels down. Later models eliminated the matting-filled barrels as being unnecessary. \n\nCartridges, held in a hopper, dropped individually into the grooves of the carrier. The lock was simultaneously forced by the cam to move forward and load the cartridge, and when the cam was at its highest point, the cocking ring freed the lock and fired the cartridge. After the cartridge was fired the continuing action of the cam drew back the lock bringing with it the spent cartridge which then dropped to the ground.\n\nThe grouped barrel concept had been explored by inventors since the 18th century, but poor engineering and the lack of a unitary cartridge made previous designs unsuccessful. The initial Gatling gun design used self-contained, reloadable steel cylinders with a chamber holding a ball and black-powder charge, and a percussion cap on one end. As the barrels rotated, these steel cylinders dropped into place, were fired, and were then ejected from the gun. The innovative features of the Gatling gun were its independent firing mechanism for each barrel and the simultaneous action of the locks, barrels, carrier and breech.\n\nThe ammunition that Gatling eventually implemented was a paper cartridge style round charged with black powder and primed with a percussion cap. because self-contained brass cartridges were not yet fully developed and available. The shells were gravity-fed into the breech through a hopper or simple box \"magazine\" with an unsprung gravity follower on top of the gun. Each barrel had its own firing mechanism. \n\nDespite self-contained brass cartridges replacing the paper cartridge in the 1860s, it wasn't until the Model 1881 that Gatling switched to the 'Bruce'-style feed system (U.S. Patents 247,158 and 343,532) that accepted two rows of .45-70 cartridges. While one row was being fed into the gun, the other could be reloaded, thus allowing sustained fire. The final gun required four operators. By 1886, the gun was capable of firing more than 400 rounds per minute.\n\nThe smallest-caliber gun also had a Broadwell drum feed in place of the curved box of the other guns. The drum, named after L. W. Broadwell, an agent for Gatling's company, comprised twenty stacks of rounds arranged around a central axis, like the spokes of a wheel, each holding twenty cartridges with the bullet noses oriented toward the central axis. This invention was patented in U. S. 110,338. As each stack emptied, the drum was manually rotated to bring a new stack into use until all 400 rounds had been fired. A more common variant had 240 rounds in twenty stands of fifteen.\n\nBy 1893, the Gatling was adapted to take the new .30 Army smokeless cartridge. The new M1893 guns featured six barrels, and were capable of a maximum (initial) rate of fire of 800–900 rounds per minute. Dr. Gatling later used examples of the M1893 powered by electric motor and belt to drive the crank. Tests demonstrated the electric Gatling could fire bursts of up to 1,500 rpm.\n\nThe M1893, with minor revisions, became the M1895, and 94 guns were produced for the U.S. Army by Colt. Four M1895 Gatlings under Lt. John H. Parker saw considerable combat during the Santiago campaign in Cuba in 1898. The M1895 was designed to accept only the Bruce feeder. All previous models were unpainted, but the M1895 was painted olive drab (O.D.) green, with some parts left blued.\n\nThe Model 1900 was very similar to the model 1895, but with only a few components finished in O.D. green. The U.S. Army purchased a quantity of M1900s. All Gatling Models 1895–1903 could be mounted on an armored field carriage. In 1903, the Army converted its M1900 guns in .30 Army to fit the new .30-03 cartridge (standardized for the M1903 Springfield rifle) as the M1903. The later M1903-'06 was an M1903 converted to .30-06. This conversion was principally carried out at the Army's Springfield Armory arsenal repair shops. All models of Gatling guns were declared obsolete by the U.S. military in 1911, after 45 years of service.\n\nAfter the Gatling gun was replaced in service by newer recoil or gas-operated weapons, the approach of using multiple externally powered rotating barrels fell into disuse for many decades. However, some examples were developed during the interwar years, but only existed as prototypes or were rarely used. The concept resurfaced after World War II with the development of the Minigun and the M61 Vulcan. Many other versions of the Gatling gun were built from the late 20th century to the present, the largest of these being the 30mm GAU-8 Avenger autocannon.\n\nThe gun was referenced in an early, unreleased Bruce Springsteen song called Jazz Musician, which was considered for inclusion on Greetings from Asbury Park, N.J., his first album.\n\nThe gun is central to the final scenes of the film The Last Samurai, starring Tom Cruise.\n\n\n\n", "id": "13057", "title": "Gatling gun"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13058", "text": "East Germany\n\nEast Germany, formally the German Democratic Republic or GDR ( ), was an Eastern Bloc state during the Cold War period. From 1949 to 1990, it administered the region of Germany that was occupied by Soviet forces at the end of World War II—the Soviet Occupation Zone of the Potsdam Agreement, bounded on the east by the Oder–Neisse line. The Soviet zone surrounded West Berlin, but did not include it; as a result, West Berlin remained outside the jurisdiction of the GDR.\nThe German Democratic Republic was established in the Soviet Zone, while the Federal Republic was established in the three western zones. East Germany was a satellite state of the Soviet Union. Soviet occupation authorities began transferring administrative responsibility to German communist leaders in 1948, and the GDR began to function as a state on 7 October 1949. Soviet forces, however, remained in the country throughout the Cold War. Until 1989, the GDR was governed by the Socialist Unity Party (SED), though other parties nominally participated in its alliance organisation, the National Front of Democratic Germany. \n\nThe economy was centrally planned, and increasingly state-owned. Prices of basic goods and services were set by central government planners, rather than rising and falling through supply and demand. Although the GDR had to pay substantial war reparations to the USSR, it became the most successful economy in the Eastern Bloc. Nonetheless it did not match the economic growth of West Germany. Emigration to the West was a significant problem—as many of the emigrants were well-educated young people, it further weakened the state economically. The government fortified its western borders and, in 1961, built the Berlin Wall. Many people attempting to flee were killed by border guards or booby traps, such as landmines.\n\nIn 1989, numerous social and political forces in the GDR and abroad led to the fall of the Berlin Wall and the establishment of a government committed to liberalization. The following year open elections were held, and international negotiations led to the signing of the Final Settlement treaty on the status and borders of Germany. The GDR was dissolved and Germany was unified on 3 October 1990, becoming a fully sovereign state again.\n\nGeographically, the German Democratic Republic bordered the Baltic Sea to the north; the Polish People's Republic to the east; Czechoslovakia to the south and West Germany to the west. Internally, the GDR also bordered the Soviet sector of Allied-occupied Berlin known as East Berlin which was also administered as the state's de facto capital. It also bordered the three sectors occupied by the United States, United Kingdom and France known collectively as West Berlin. The three sectors occupied by the Western nations were sealed off from the rest of the GDR by the Berlin Wall from its construction in 1961 until it was brought down in 1989.\n\nThe official name was \"Deutsche Demokratische Republik\" (German Democratic Republic), usually abbreviated to \"DDR\". Both terms were used in East Germany, with increasing usage of the abbreviated form, especially since East Germany considered West Germans and West Berliners to be foreigners following the promulgation of its second constitution in 1968.\nWest Germans, the western media and statesmen purposely avoided the official name and its abbreviation, instead using terms like\n\"Ostzone\" (Eastern Zone), \"Sowjetische Besatzungszone\" (Soviet Occupation Zone; often abbreviated to \"SBZ\"), and \"sogenannte DDR\" (or \"so-called GDR\"). \nThe centre of political power in East Berlin was referred to as \"Pankow\". (The seat of command of the Soviet forces in East Germany was referred to as Karlshorst.) Over time, however, the abbreviation \"DDR\" was also increasingly used colloquially by West Germans and West German media.\n\nThe term \"Westdeutschland\" (West Germany), when used by West Germans was almost always a reference to the geographic region of Western Germany and not to the area within the boundaries of the Federal Republic of Germany. However, this use was not always consistent; for example, West Berliners frequently used the term \"Westdeutschland\" to denote the Federal Republic. Before World War II, \"Ostdeutschland (\"eastern Germany) was used to describe all the territories east of the Elbe (East Elbia), as reflected in the works of sociologist Max Weber and political theorist Carl Schmitt.\n\nExplaining the internal impact of the GDR government from the perspective of German history in the long term, historian Gerhard A. Ritter (2002) has argued that the East German state was defined by two dominant forces – Soviet communism on the one hand, and German traditions filtered through the interwar experiences of German communists on the other. It was constrained by the powerful example of the increasingly prosperous West, to which East Germans compared their state. The changes made by the communists were most apparent in ending capitalism and transforming industry and agriculture, and in the thrust of the educational system and the media. On the other hand, there was relatively little change made in the historically independent domains of the sciences, the engineering professions, the Protestant churches, and in many bourgeois lifestyles. Social policy, says Ritter, became a critical legitimization tool in the last decades and mixed socialist and traditional elements about equally.\n\nAt the Yalta Conference during World War II, the Allies (the U.S., the UK and the Soviet Union) agreed on dividing a defeated Nazi Germany into occupation zones, and on dividing Berlin, the German capital, among the Allied powers as well. Initially this meant the construction of three zones of occupation, i.e., American, British, and Soviet. Later, a French zone was carved out of the American and British zones.\n\nThe ruling communist party, known as the Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED), was formed in April 1946 from the merger between the Communist Party of Germany (KPD) and the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) by mandate of Joseph Stalin. The two former parties were notorious rivals when they were active before the Nazis consolidated all power and criminalised their agitation. The unification of the two parties was symbolic of the new friendship of German socialists in defeating their common enemy; however, the communists, who held a majority, had virtually total control over policy. The SED was the ruling party for the entire duration of the East German state. It had close ties with the USSR, which maintained military forces in East Germany until its collapse in 1991 (the Russian Federation continued to maintain forces in what had been East Germany until 1994), with the stated purpose of countering NATO bases in West Germany. Historians debate whether the decision to form a separate country was initiated by the USSR or by the SED.\n\nAs West Germany was reorganized and gained independence from its occupiers, the German Democratic Republic was established in East Germany in 1949. The creation of the two states solidified the 1945 division of Germany. On 10 March 1952, (in what would become known as the \"Stalin Note\") Stalin put forth a proposal to reunify Germany with a policy of neutrality, with no conditions on economic policies and with guarantees for \"the rights of man and basic freedoms, including freedom of speech, press, religious persuasion, political conviction, and assembly\" and free activity of democratic parties and organizations. This was turned down; reunification wasn't a priority for the leadership of West Germany, and the NATO powers declined the proposal, asserting that Germany should be able to join NATO and that such a negotiation with the Soviet Union would be seen as a capitulation. There have been several debates about whether a real chance for reunification had been missed in 1952.\n\nIn 1949 the Soviets turned control of East Germany over to the Socialist Unity Party, headed by Wilhelm Pieck (1876–1960), who became president of the GDR and held the office until his death, while most executive authority was assumed by SED General Secretary Walter Ulbricht. Socialist leader Otto Grotewohl (1894–1964) became prime minister until his death.\n\nThe government of East Germany denounced West German failures in accomplishing denazification and renounced ties to the Nazi past, imprisoning many former Nazis and preventing them from holding government positions. The SED set a primary goal of ridding East Germany of all traces of the fascist regime. The SED party platform claimed to support democratic elections and the protection of individual liberties in building up socialism.\n\nIn 1945, the USSR declared the Soviet occupation zone – the historic middle portion of Germany – to be a sovereign state named the \"Deutsche Demokratische Republik\" (German Democratic Republic, established in 1949), while the Red Army and the Western Allies' occupation forces remained in place under the tripartite Potsdam Agreement (1945) which established the Allied Occupation of Germany.\n\nThe communist German Democratic Republic was established in the historic \"Mitteldeutschland\" (Middle Germany). Former German territories east of the Oder and Neisse rivers, mainly the Prussian provinces of Pomerania, East Prussia, West Prussia, Upper Silesia, Lower Silesia, the eastern Neumark of Brandenburg, and a small piece of Saxony were thus detached from Germany. To compensate Poland for the USSR's annexation of its eastern provinces, the Allies provisionally established Poland's post-war western border at the Oder–Neisse line at the Yalta Conference (1945). As a result, most of Germany's central territories became the \"Sowjetische Besatzungszone\" (SBZ, Soviet Occupation Zone). All other lands east of the Oder–Neisse line were put under Polish administration, with the exception of historic northern East Prussia, which went to the USSR.\n\nIn the Yalta and Potsdam conferences, the Allies established their joint military occupation and administration of Germany via the Allied Control Council (ACC), a four-power (US, UK, USSR, France) military government effective until the restoration of German sovereignty. In eastern Germany, the Soviet Occupation Zone (SBZ – \"Sowjetische Besatzungszone\") comprised the five states (\"Länder\") of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Brandenburg, Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt, and Thuringia. Disagreements over the policies to be followed in the occupied zones quickly led to a breakdown in cooperation between the four powers, and the Soviets administered their zone without regard to the policies implemented in the other zones. The Soviets withdrew from the ACC in 1948; subsequently as the other three zones were increasingly unified and granted self-government, the Soviet administration instituted a separate socialist government in its zone.\n\nYet, seven years after the Allies’ Potsdam Agreement to a unified Germany, the USSR via the Stalin Note (10 March 1952) proposed German reunification and superpower disengagement from Central Europe, which the three Western Allies (the United States, France, the United Kingdom) rejected. Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, a Communist proponent of reunification, died in early March 1953. Similarly, Lavrenty Beria, the First Deputy Prime Minister of the USSR, pursued German reunification, but he was removed from power that same year before he could act on the matter. His successor, Nikita Khrushchev, rejected reunification as equivalent to returning East Germany for annexation to the West; hence reunification went unconsidered until 1989.\n\nEast Germany considered East Berlin to be its capital, and the Soviet Union and the rest of the Eastern Bloc diplomatically recognized East Berlin as the capital. However, the Western Allies disputed this recognition, considering the entire city of Berlin to be occupied territory governed by the Allied Control Council. According to Margarete Feinstein, East Berlin's status as the capital was largely unrecognized by the West and most Third World countries. In practice, the ACC’s authority was rendered moot by the Cold War, and East Berlin's status as occupied territory largely became a legal fiction, and the former Soviet sector became fully integrated into the GDR.\n\nThe deepening Cold War conflict between the Western Powers and the Soviet Union over the unresolved status of West Berlin led to the Berlin Blockade (24 June 1948 – 12 May 1949). The Soviet army initiated the blockade by halting all Allied rail, road, and water traffic to and from West Berlin. The Allies countered the Soviets with the Berlin Airlift (1948–49) of food, fuel, and supplies to West Berlin.\n\nOn 21 April 1946, the Communist Party of Germany (\"Kommunistische Partei Deutschlands\" – KPD) and the Social Democratic Party of Germany (\"Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands\" – SPD) merged to form the Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED – \"Sozialistische Einheitspartei Deutschlands\"), which then won the elections of 1946, held under the oversight of the Soviet army. Being a Marxist–Leninist political party, the SED's government nationalised infrastructure and industrial plants.\n\nIn 1948, the German Economic Commission (Deutsche Wirtschaftskomission—DWK) under its chairman Heinrich Rau assumed administrative authority in the Soviet occupation zone, thus becoming the predecessor of an East German government.\n\nOn 7 October 1949, the SED established the \"Deutsche Demokratische Republik\" (German Democratic Republic – GDR), based on a socialist political constitution establishing its control of the anti-fascist National Front of the German Democratic Republic (NF, \"Nationale Front der Deutschen Demokratischen Republik\"), an omnibus alliance of every party and mass organisation in East Germany. The NF was established to stand for election to the \"Volkskammer\" (People's Chamber), the East German parliament. The first and only President of the German Democratic Republic was Wilhelm Pieck. However, after 1950, political power in East Germany was held by the First Secretary of the SED, Walter Ulbricht.\n\nOn 16 June 1953, workers constructing the new \"Stalinallee\" boulevard in East Berlin, according to The Sixteen Principles of Urban Design, rioted against a 10% production quota increase. Initially a labour protest, it soon included the general populace, and on 17 June similar protests occurred throughout the GDR, with more than a million people striking in some 700 cities and towns. Fearing anti-communist counter-revolution on 18 June 1953, the government of the GDR enlisted the Soviet Occupation Forces to aid the police in ending the riot; some fifty people were killed and 10,000 were jailed. (See Uprising of 1953 in East Germany.)\n\nThe German war reparations owed to the USSR impoverished the Soviet Zone of Occupation and severely weakened the East German economy. In the 1945–46 period, the Soviets confiscated and transported to the USSR approximately 33% of the industrial plant and by the early 1950s had extracted some US$10 billion in reparations in agricultural and industrial products. The poverty of East Germany induced by reparations provoked the \"Republikflucht\" (\"desertion from the republic\") to West Germany, further weakening the GDR's economy. Western economic opportunities induced a brain drain. In response, the GDR closed the Inner German Border, and on the night of 12 August 1961, East German soldiers began erecting the Berlin Wall.\n\nIn 1971, Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev had Ulbricht removed; Erich Honecker replaced him. While the Ulbricht government had experimented with liberal reforms, the Honecker government reversed them. The new government introduced a new East German Constitution which defined the German Democratic Republic as a \"republic of workers and peasants\".\n\nInitially, East Germany claimed an exclusive mandate for all of Germany, a claim supported by most of the Communist bloc. It claimed that West Germany was an illegally constituted NATO puppet state. However, from the 1960s onward, East Germany began recognizing itself as a separate country from West Germany, and shared the legacy of the united German state of 1871–1945. This was formalized in 1974, when the reunification clause was removed from the revised East German constitution. West Germany, in contrast, maintained that it was the only legitimate government of Germany. From 1949 to the early 1970s, West Germany maintained that East Germany was an illegally constituted state. It argued that the GDR was a Soviet puppet state, and frequently referred to it as the \"Soviet occupation zone\". This position was shared by West Germany's allies as well until 1973. East Germany was recognized primarily by Communist countries and the Arab bloc, along with some \"scattered sympathizers\". According to the Hallstein Doctrine (1955), West Germany also did not diplomatically recognize any country – except the USSR – that recognized East German sovereignty.\n\nBut in the early 1970s, the \"Ostpolitik\" (\"Eastern Policy\") of \"Change Through Rapprochement\" of the pragmatic government of FRG Chancellor Willy Brandt, established normal diplomatic relations with the East Bloc states. This policy saw the Treaty of Moscow (August 1970), the Treaty of Warsaw (December 1970), the Four Power Agreement on Berlin (September 1971), the Transit Agreement (May 1972), and the Basic Treaty (December 1972), which relinquished any claims to an exclusive mandate over Germany as a whole and established normal relations between the Germanys. Both countries were admitted into the United Nations on 18 September 1973. This also increased the number of countries recognizing East Germany to 55, including the US, UK and France, though these three still refused to recognize East Berlin as the capital, and insisted on a specific provision in the UN resolution accepting the two Germanies into the UN to that effect. \n\nFrom the beginning, the newly formed GDR tried to establish its own separate identity. Because of the imperial and military legacy of Prussia, the SED repudiated continuity between Prussia and the GDR. The SED destroyed a number of symbolic relics of the former Prussian aristocracy: the Junker manor houses were torn down, the Berliner Stadtschloß was razed, and the equestrian statue of Frederick the Great was removed from East Berlin. Instead the SED focused on the progressive heritage of German history, including Thomas Müntzer's role in the German Peasants' War and the role played by the heroes of the class struggle during Prussia's industrialization.\n\nEspecially after the Ninth Party Congress in 1976, East Germany upheld historical reformers such as Karl Freiherr vom Stein, Karl August von Hardenberg, Wilhelm von Humboldt, and Gerhard von Scharnhorst as examples and role models.\n\nIn the early 1980s, West Germany adopted the line of \"two German states in one German nation\". While it respected East Germany's independence, it formally maintained that the GDR was merely a \"de facto\" government within a single German nation of which the FRG was the sole representative. For instance, it did not treat East Germans as foreigners.\n\nIn 1989, following widespread public anger over the faking of results of local government elections that spring, many citizens applied for exit visas or left the country contrary to GDR laws. In August 1989 Hungary removed its border restrictions and unsealed its border, and more than 13,000 people left East Germany by crossing the border via Czechoslovakia into Hungary and then on to Austria and West Germany. Many others demonstrated against the ruling party, especially in the city of Leipzig. Kurt Masur, the conductor of the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra, led local negotiations with the government and held town meetings in the concert hall. The demonstrations eventually led Erich Honecker to resign in October, and he was replaced by a slightly more moderate communist, Egon Krenz.\n\nOn 9 November 1989, a few sections of the Berlin Wall were opened, resulting in thousands of East Germans crossing freely into West Berlin and West Germany for the first time in nearly 30 years. Krenz resigned a few days later, and the SED abandoned power shortly afterward. Although there were some limited attempts to create a permanent democratic East Germany, this did not come to pass.\n\nEast Germany held its last elections in March 1990. The winner was a coalition headed by the East German branch of West Germany's Christian Democratic Union, which advocated speedy reunification. Negotiations (2+4 Talks) were held involving the two German states and the former Allied Powers which led to agreement on the conditions for German unification. By a two-thirds vote in the \"Volkskammer\" on 23 August 1990, the GDR declared its accession to the Federal Republic. The five original East German states that had been abolished in the 1952 redistricting were recreated. On 3 October 1990, the five states officially joined the Federal Republic of Germany, while East and West Berlin united as a third city-state (in the same manner as Bremen and Hamburg). On 1 July a currency union preceded the political union: the \"Ostmark\" was abolished, and the Western German \"Deutsche Mark\" became common currency.\n\nThe great economic and socio-political inequalities between the former Germanies required government subsidy for the full integration of East Germany to the Federal German Republic. Because of the resulting deindustrialisation in the former East Germany, the causes of the failure of this integration continue to be debated. Some western commentators claim that the depressed eastern economy is a natural aftereffect of a demonstrably inefficient socialist economy. But many East German critics contend that the shock-therapy style of privatization, the artificially high rate of exchange offered for the Ostmark, and the speed with which the entire process was implemented did not leave room for East German enterprises to adapt.\n\nThere were four periods in East German political history. These included: 1949–61, which saw the building of socialism; 1961–1970 after the Berlin Wall closed off escape was a period of stability and consolidation; 1971–85 was termed the Honecker Era, and saw closer ties with West Germany; and 1985–89 saw the decline and extinction of East Germany.\n\nThe ruling political party in East Germany was the \"Sozialistische Einheitspartei Deutschlands\" (Socialist Unity Party of Germany, SED). It was created in 1946 through the Soviet-directed merger of the Communist Party of Germany (KPD) and the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) in the Soviet controlled zone. However, the SED quickly transformed into a full-fledged Communist party as the more independent-minded Social Democrats were pushed out.\n\nThe Potsdam Agreement committed the Soviets to supporting a democratic form of government in Germany, though the Soviets' understanding of \"democracy\" was radically different from that of the West. As in other Soviet-bloc countries, non-communist political parties were allowed. Nevertheless, every political party in the GDR was forced to join the National Front of Democratic Germany, a broad coalition of parties and mass political organisations, including:\n\n\nThe member parties were almost completely subservient to the SED, and had to accept its \"leading role\" as a condition of their existence. However, the parties did have representation in the Volkskammer and received some posts in the government.\n\nThe Volkskammer also included representatives from the \"mass organisations\" like the Free German Youth (\"Freie Deutsche Jugend\" or \"FDJ\"), or the Free German Trade Union Federation. There was also a Democratic Women's Federation of Germany, with seats in the Volkskammer.\n\nImportant non-parliamentary mass organisations in East German society included the German Gymnastics and Sports Association (\"Deutscher Turn- und Sportbund\" or \"DTSB\"), and People's Solidarity (\"Volkssolidarität\"), an organisation for the elderly. Another society of note was the Society for German-Soviet Friendship.\n\nAfter the collapse of Communism, the SED was renamed the \"Party of Democratic Socialism\" (PDS) which continued for a decade after reunification before merging with the West German WASG to form the Left Party (\"Die Linke\"). The Left Party continues to be a political force in many parts of Germany, albeit drastically less powerful than the SED.\n\nThe East German population declined by three million people throughout its forty-one year history, from 19 million in 1948 to 16 million in 1990; of the 1948 population, some 4 million were deported from the lands east of the Oder-Neisse line. This compares starkly with Poland, which increased during that time from 24 million in 1950 (a little more than East Germany) to 38 million (more than twice East Germany's population). This was primarily a result of emigration—about one quarter of East Germans left the country before the Berlin Wall was completed in 1961, and after that time, East Germany had very low birth rates, except for a recovery in the 1980s when the birth rate in East Germany was considerably higher than in West Germany. In general the birth rate per woman was never much lower than in West Germany, except during the 1990s.\n\nUntil 1952, East Germany comprised the capital, East Berlin (though legally, it was not fully part of the GDR's territory), and the five German states of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern (in 1947 renamed Mecklenburg), Brandenburg, Saxony-Anhalt, Thuringia, and Saxony, their post-war territorial demarcations approximating the pre-war German demarcations of the Middle German \"Länder\" (states) and \"Provinzen\" (provinces of Prussia). The western parts of two provinces, Pomerania and Lower Silesia, the remainder of which were annexed by Poland, remained in the GDR and were attached to Mecklenburg and Saxony, respectively.\n\nThe East German Administrative Reform of 1952 established 14 \"Bezirke\" (districts) and \"de facto\" disestablished the five \"Länder\". The new \"Bezirke\", named after their district centres, were as follows: (i) Rostock, (ii) Neubrandenburg, and (iii) Schwerin created from the \"Land\" (state) of Mecklenburg; (iv) Potsdam, (v) Frankfurt (Oder), and (vii) Cottbus from Brandenburg; (vi) Magdeburg and (viii) Halle from Saxony-Anhalt; (ix) Leipzig, (xi) Dresden, and (xii) Karl-Marx-Stadt (Chemnitz until 1953 and again from 1990) from Saxony; and (x) Erfurt, (xiii) Gera, and (xiv) Suhl from Thuringia.\n\nEast Berlin was made the country’s 15th \"Bezirk\" in 1961 but retained special legal status until 1968, when the residents approved the new (draft) constitution. Despite the city as a whole being legally under the control of the Allied Control Council, and diplomatic objections of the Allied governments, the GDR administered the \"Bezirk\" of Berlin as part of its territory.\n\nThe government of East Germany had control over a large number of military and paramilitary organisations through various ministries. Chief among these was the Ministry of National Defence. Because of East Germany's proximity to the West during the Cold War (1945–91), its military forces were among the most advanced of the Warsaw Pact. Defining what was a military force and what was not is a matter of some dispute.\n\nThe Nationale Volksarmee (NVA) was the largest military organisation in East Germany. It was formed in 1956 from the Kasernierte Volkspolizei (Barracked People's Police), the military units of the regular police (Volkspolizei), when East Germany joined the Warsaw Pact. From its creation, it was controlled by the Ministry of National Defence (East Germany). It was an all volunteer force until an eighteen-month conscription period was introduced in 1962. It was considered one of the most professional and best prepared military forces in the world. The NVA consisted of the following branches:\n\nThe border troops of the Eastern sector were originally organised as a police force, the Deutsche Grenzpolizei, similar to the Bundesgrenzschutz in West Germany. It was controlled by the Ministry of the Interior. Following the remilitarisation of East Germany in 1956, the Deutsche Grenzpolizei was transformed into a military force in 1961, modeled after the Soviet Border Troops, and transferred to the Ministry of National Defense, as part of the National People's Army. In 1973, it was separated from the NVA, but it remained under the same ministry. It was an all-volunteer force. At its peak, it numbered approximately 47,000 men.\n\nAfter the NVA was separated from the Volkspolizei in 1956, the Ministry of the Interior maintained its own public order barracked reserve, known as the Volkspolizei-Bereitschaften (VPB). These units were, like the Kasernierte Volkspolizei, equipped as motorised infantry, and they numbered between 12,000 and 15,000 men.\n\nThe Ministry of State Security (Stasi) included the Felix Dzerzhinsky Guards Regiment, which was mainly involved with facilities security and plain clothes events security. They were the only part of the feared Stasi that was visible to the public, and so were very unpopular within the population. The Stasi numbered around 90,000 men, the Guards Regiment around 11,000-12,000 men.\n\nThe \"Kampfgruppen der Arbeiterklasse\" (combat groups of the working class) numbered around 400,000 for much of their existence, and were organised around factories and neighbourhoods. The KdA was the political-military instrument of the SED; it was essentially a \"party Army\". All KdA directives and decisions were made by the ZK's \"Politbüro\". They received their training from the Volkspolizei and the Ministry of the Interior. Membership was voluntary, but SED members were required to join as part of their membership obligation.\n\nEvery man was required to serve eighteen months of compulsory military service; for the medically unqualified and conscientious objector, there were the \"Baueinheiten\" (construction units), established in 1964, two years after the introduction of conscription, in response to political pressure by the national Lutheran Protestant Church upon the GDR’s government. In the 1970s, East German leaders acknowledged that former construction soldiers were at a disadvantage when they rejoined the civilian sphere.\n\nThe East German state promoted an anti-imperialist line that was reflected in all its media and all the schools. This line followed Lenin's theory of imperialism as the highest and last stage of capitalism, and Dimitrov's theory of fascism as the dictatorship of the most reactionary elements of financial capitalism. Popular reaction to these measures was mixed, and Western media penetrated the country both through cross-border television and radio broadcasts from West Germany and from the American propaganda network Radio Free Europe. Dissidents, particularly professionals, sometimes fled to West Germany, which was relatively easy before the construction of the Berlin Wall in 1961.\n\nAfter receiving wider international diplomatic recognition in 1972-73, the DDR began active cooperation with Third World socialist governments and national liberation movements. While the USSR was in control of the overall strategy and Cuban armed forces were involved in the actual combat (mostly in the People's Republic of Angola and socialist Ethiopia), the DDR provided experts for military hardware maintenance and personnel training, and oversaw creation of secret security agencies based on its own Stasi model.\n\nAlready in the 1960s contacts were established with Angola’s MPLA, Mozambique’s FRELIMO and the PAIGC in Guinea Bissau and Cape Verde. In the 1970s official cooperation was established with other self-proclaimed socialist governments and people’s republics: People's Republic of the Congo, People's Democratic Republic of Yemen, Somali Democratic Republic, Libya, and the People's Republic of Benin.\n\nThe first military agreement was signed in 1973 with the People's Republic of the Congo. In 1979 friendship treaties were signed with Angola, Mozambique and Ethiopia.\n\nIt was estimated that altogether 2000 – 4000 DDR military and security experts were dispatched to Africa. In addition, representatives from African and Arab countries and liberation movements underwent military training in the DDR.\n\nThe East German economy began poorly because of the devastation caused by the war, the loss of so many young soldiers, the disruption of business and transportation, the presence of so many refugees, and finally reparations owed to the USSR. The Red Army dismantled and transported to Russia the infrastructure and industrial plants of the Soviet Zone of Occupation. By the early 1950s, the reparations were paid in agricultural and industrial products; and Lower Silesia, with its coal mines and Szczecin, an important natural port, were given to Poland by the decision of Stalin.\n\nThe socialist centrally planned economy of the German Democratic Republic was like that of the USSR. In 1950, the GDR joined the COMECON trade bloc. In 1985, collective (state) enterprises earned 96.7% of the net national income. To ensure stable prices for goods and services, the state paid 80% of basic supply costs. The estimated 1984 per capita income was $9,800 ($22,600 in 2015 dollars). In 1976, the average annual growth of the GDP was approximately five percent. This made East German economy the richest in all of the Soviet Bloc until 1990 after the Communist collapse in the country.\n\nNotable East German exports were photographic cameras, under the Praktica brand; automobiles under the Trabant, Wartburg, and the IFA brands; hunting rifles, sextants, typewriters and wristwatches.\n\nUntil the 1960s, East Germans endured shortages of basic foodstuffs such as sugar and coffee. East Germans with friends or relatives in the West (or with any access to a hard currency) and the necessary Staatsbank foreign currency account could afford Western products and export-quality East German products via Intershop. Consumer goods also were available, by post, from the Danish Jauerfood, and Genex companies.\n\nThe government used money and prices as political devices, providing highly subsidised prices for a wide range of basic goods and services, in what was known as \"the second pay packet\". At the production level, artificial prices made for a system of semi-barter and resource hoarding. For the consumer, it led to the substitution of GDR money with time, barter, and hard currencies. Ironically, the socialist economy became steadily more dependent on financial infusions from hard-currency loans from West Germany. East Germans, meanwhile, came to see their soft currency as worthless relative to the Deutsche Mark (DM).\n\nMany western commentators have maintained that loyalty to the SED was a primary criterion for getting a good job, and that professionalism was secondary to political criteria in personnel recruitment and development.\n\nNo worker could be sacked, unless for serious misconduct or incompetence; even in such cases, alternative work would be offered. The GDR had no system of unemployment benefit because the concept of unemployment did not exist.\n\nWith a very low birth rate and a high rate of exodus, East Germany was losing workers. \nAs the goal of socialism is the elimination of capitalist economics, the GDR strove to reduce wealth disparity between individuals through the elimination of private property, businesses and stores. While enforcement of this ideal led to a more economically even society, it prompted many with economic ambition or those who did not agree with its enforcement to escape—typically those with higher education: doctors, scientists, engineers, and skilled workers. This growing loss of skilled personnel was intended to be curtailed with the building of the wall.\n\nBeginning in 1963 with a series of secret international agreements, East Germany recruited workers from Poland, Hungary, Cuba, Albania, Mozambique, Angola and Vietnam. They numbered more than 100,000 by 1989. Many, such as future politician Zeca Schall (who emigrated from Angola in 1988 as a contract worker) stayed in Germany after the Wende.\n\nReligion became contested ground in the GDR, with the governing Communists promoting state atheism, although some people remained loyal to Christian communities. In 1957 the State authorities established a State Secretariat for Church Affairs to handle the government's contact with churches and with religious groups; the SED remained officially atheist.\n\nIn 1950, 85% of the GDR citizens were Protestants, while 10% were Roman Catholics. In 1961, the renowned philosophical theologian, Paul Tillich, claimed that the Protestant population in East Germany had the most admirable Church in Protestantism, because the Communists there had not been able to win a spiritual victory over them. By 1989, membership in the Christian churches dropped significantly. Protestants constituted 25% of the population, Roman Catholics 5%. The share of people who considered themselves irreligious rose from 5% in 1950 to 70% in 1989.\n\nThe policies of the state, communist propaganda, the oppression of churches by the state and the general rise in religious scepticism, all encouraged people to leave their respective churches. This resulted in states (\"Bundesländer\") of the former East Germany remaining particularly irreligious.\n\nWhen it first came to power, the Communist party asserted the compatibility of Christianity and Marxism and sought Christian participation in the building of socialism. At first the promotion of atheism received little official attention. In the mid-1950s, as the Cold War heated up, atheism became a topic of major interest for the state, in both domestic and foreign contexts. University chairs and departments devoted to the study of scientific atheism were founded and much literature (scholarly and popular) on the subject was produced. This activity subsided in the late 1960s amid perceptions that it had started to become counterproductive. Official and scholarly attention to atheism renewed beginning in 1973, though this time with more emphasis on scholarship and on the training of cadres than on propaganda. Throughout, the attention paid to atheism in East Germany was never intended to jeopardise the cooperation that was desired from those East Germans who were religious. Eastern Germany is one of the least religious regions in the world today. (Compare Irreligion by country.)\n\nEast Germany, historically, was majority Protestant (primarily Lutheran) from the early stages of the Protestant Reformation onwards. In 1948, freed from the influence of the Nazi-oriented German Christians, Lutheran, Reformed and United churches from most parts of Germany came together as the Evangelical Church in Germany (EKD) at the Conference of Eisenach (\"Kirchenversammlung von Eisenach\").\n\nIn 1969 the regional Protestant churches in East Germany and East Berlin broke away from the EKD and formed the \"Federation of Protestant Churches in the German Democratic Republic\" (, BEK), in 1970 also joined by the Moravian \"Herrnhuter Brüdergemeine\". In June 1991, following the German reunification, the BEK churches again merged with the EKD ones.\n\nBetween 1956 and 1971 the leadership of the East German Lutheran churches gradually changed its relations with the state from hostility to cooperation. From the founding of the GDR in 1949, the Socialist Unity Party sought to weaken the influence of the church on the rising generation. The church adopted an attitude of confrontation and distance toward the state. Around 1956 this began to develop into a more neutral stance accommodating conditional loyalty. The government was no longer regarded as illegitimate; instead, the church leaders started viewing the authorities as installed by God and, therefore, deserving of obedience by Christians. But on matters where the state demanded something which the churches felt was not in accordance with the will of God, the churches reserved their right to say no. There were both structural and intentional causes behind this development. Structural causes included the hardening of Cold War tensions in Europe in the mid-1950s, which made it clear that the East German state was not temporary. The loss of church members also made it clear to the leaders of the church that they had to come into some kind of dialogue with the state. The intentions behind the change of attitude varied from a traditional liberal Lutheran acceptance of secular power to a positive attitude toward socialist ideas.\n\nManfred Stolpe became a lawyer for the Brandenburg Protestant Church in 1959 before taking up a position at church headquarters in Berlin. In 1969 he helped found the \"Bund der Evangelischen Kirchen in der DDR\" (BEK), where he negotiated with the government while at the same time working within the institutions of this Protestant body. He won the regional elections for the Brandenburg state assembly at the head of the SPD list in 1990. Stolpe remained in the Brandenburg government until he joined the federal government in 2002.\n\nApart from the Protestant state churches () united in the EKD/BEK and the Roman Catholic Church there was a number of smaller Protestant bodies, including Protestant Free Churches () united in the and the , as well as , and . The Moravian Church also had its presence as the \"Herrnhuter Brüdergemeine\". There were also other Protestants such as Methodists, Adventists, Mennonites and Quakers.\n\nThe smaller Roman Catholic Church in eastern Germany had a fully functioning episcopal hierarchy that was in full accord with the Vatican. During the early postwar years, tensions were high. The Catholic Church as a whole (and particularly the bishops) resisted both the East German state and Marxist ideology. The state allowed the bishops to lodge protests, which they did on issues such as abortion.\n\nAfter 1945 the Church did fairly well in integrating Catholic exiles from lands to the east (which mostly became part of Poland) and in adjusting its institutional structures to meet the needs of a church within an officially atheist society. This meant an increasingly hierarchical church structure, whereas in the area of religious education, press, and youth organisations, a system of temporary staff was developed, one that took into account the special situation of Caritas, a Catholic charity organisation. By 1950, therefore, there existed a Catholic subsociety that was well adjusted to prevailing specific conditions and capable of maintaining Catholic identity.\n\nWith a generational change in the episcopacy taking place in the early 1980s, the state hoped for better relations with the new bishops, but the new bishops instead began holding unauthorised mass meetings, promoting international ties in discussions with theologians abroad, and hosting ecumenical conferences. The new bishops became less politically oriented and more involved in pastoral care and attention to spiritual concerns. The government responded by limiting international contacts for bishops.\n\nEast Germany's culture was strongly influenced by communist thought and was marked by an attempt to define itself in opposition to the west, particularly West Germany and the United States. Critics of the East German state have claimed that the state's commitment to communism was a hollow and cynical tool, Machiavellian in nature, but this assertion has been challenged by studies that have found that the East German leadership was genuinely committed to the advance of scientific knowledge, economic development, and social progress. However, Pence and Betts argue, the majority of East Germans over time increasingly regarded the state's ideals to be hollow, though there was also a substantial number of East Germans who regarded their culture as having a healthier, more authentic mentality than that of West Germany.\n\nThe Puhdys and Karat were some of the most popular mainstream bands in East Germany. Like most mainstream acts, they appeared in popular youth magazines such as \"Neues Leben\" and \"Magazin\". Other popular rock bands were Wir, Dean Reed, City, Silly and Pankow. Most of these artists recorded on the state-owned AMIGA label. \n\nWest German television and radio could be received in many parts of the East. The Western influence led to the formation of more \"underground\" groups with a decisively western-oriented sound. A few of these bands were Die Skeptiker, Die Art and Feeling B. Additionally, hip hop culture reached the ears of the East German youth. With videos such as \"Beat Street\" and \"Wild Style\", young East Germans were able to develop a hip hop culture of their own. East Germans accepted hip hop as more than just a music form. The entire street culture surrounding rap entered the region and became an outlet for oppressed youth.\n\nThe government of the GDR was invested in both promoting the tradition of German classical music, and in supporting composers to write new works in that tradition. Notable East German composers include Hanns Eisler, Paul Dessau, Ernst Hermann Meyer, Rudolf Wagner-Régeny, and Kurt Schwaen. \nThe birthplace of Johann Sebastian Bach (1685–1750), Eisenach, was rendered as a museum about him, featuring more than three hundred instruments, which, in 1980, received some 70,000 visitors. In Leipzig, the Bach archive contains his compositions and correspondence and recordings of his music.\n\nGovernmental support of classical music maintained some fifty symphony orchestras, such as Gewandhausorchester and Thomanerchor in Leipzig; Sächsische Staatskapelle in Dresden; and Berliner Sinfonie Orchester and Staatsoper Unter den Linden in Berlin. \n\nEast German theatre was originally dominated by Bertolt Brecht, who brought back many artists out of exile and reopened the \"Theater am Schiffbauerdamm\" with his Berliner Ensemble. Alternatively, other influences tried to establish a \"Working Class Theatre\", played for the working class by the working class.\n\nAfter Brecht's death, conflicts began to arise between his family (around Helene Weigel) and other artists about Brecht's heritage. Heinz Kahlau, Slatan Dudow, Erwin Geschonneck, Erwin Strittmatter, Peter Hacks, Benno Besson, Peter Palitzsch and Ekkehard Schall were considered to be among Bertolt Brecht's scholars and followers.\n\nIn the 1950s the Swiss director Benno Besson with the Deutsches Theater successfully toured Europe and Asia including Japan with \"The Dragon\" by Jewgenij Schwarz. In the 1960s, he became the Intendant of the Volksbühne often working with Heiner Müller.\n\nIn the 1970s, a parallel theatre scene sprung up, creating theatre \"outside of Berlin\" in which artists played at provincial theatres. For example, Peter Sodann founded the Neues Theater in Halle/Saale and Frank Castorf at the theater Anklam.\n\nTheatre and cabaret had high status in the GDR, which allowed it to be very pro-active. This often brought it into confrontation with the state. Benno Besson once said, \"In contrast to artists in the west, they took us seriously, we had a bearing.\" \n\nImportant theatres include the Berliner Ensemble, the Deutsches Theater, the Maxim Gorki Theater, and the Volksbühne.\n\nThe prolific cinema of East Germany was headed by the DEFA, \"Deutsche Film AG\", which was subdivided in different local groups, for example \"Gruppe Berlin\", \"Gruppe Babelsberg\" or \"Gruppe Johannisthal\", where the local teams shot and produced films. The East German industry became known worldwide for its productions, especially children's movies (\"Das kalte Herz\", film versions of the Brothers Grimm fairy tales and modern productions such as \"Das Schulgespenst\"). \n\nFrank Beyer's \"Jakob der Lügner\" (Jacob the Liar), about the Holocaust, and \"Fünf Patronenhülsen\" (Five Cartridges), about resistance against fascism, became internationally famous. \n\nFilms about daily life, such as \"Die Legende von Paul und Paula\", by Heiner Carow, and \"Solo Sunny\", directed by Konrad Wolf and Wolfgang Kohlhaase, were very popular. \n\nThe film industry was remarkable for its production of \"Ostern\", or Western-like movies. Native Americans in these films often took the role of displaced people who fight for their rights, in contrast to the American westerns of the time, where Native Americans were often either not mentioned at all or are portrayed as the villains. Yugoslavians were often cast as the Native Americans because of the small number of Native Americans in Europe. Gojko Mitić was well known in these roles, often playing the righteous, kindhearted and charming chief (\"Die Söhne der großen Bärin\" directed by Josef Mach). He became an honorary Sioux chief when he visited the United States in the 1990s, and the television crew accompanying him showed the tribe one of his movies. American actor and singer Dean Reed, an expatriate who lived in East Germany, also starred in several films. These films were part of the phenomenon of Europe producing alternative films about the colonization of America. \n\nCinemas in the GDR also showed foreign films. Czechoslovak and Polish productions were more common, but certain western movies were shown, though the numbers of these were limited because it cost foreign exchange to buy the licences. Further, movies representing or glorifying capitalist ideology were not bought. Comedies enjoyed great popularity, such as the Danish \"Olsen Gang\" or movies with the French comedian Louis de Funès. \n\nSince the fall of the Berlin Wall, several movies depicting life in the GDR have been critically acclaimed. Some of the most notable were \"Good Bye Lenin!\" by Wolfgang Becker , \"Das Leben der Anderen\" (The Lives of Others) by Florian Henckel von Donnersmarck (won the Academy Award for best Film in a Foreign Language) in 2006, and \"Alles auf Zucker!\" (Go for Zucker) by Dani Levi. Each film is heavily infused with cultural nuances unique to life in the GDR. \n\nEast Germany was very successful in the sports of cycling, weight-lifting, swimming, gymnastics, track and field, boxing, ice skating, and winter sports. The success is attributed to the leadership of Dr. Manfred Hoeppner which started in the late 1960s. \n\nAnother supporting reason was doping in East Germany, especially with anabolic steroids, the most detected doping substances in IOC-accredited laboratories for many years. The development and implementation of a state-supported sports doping program helped East Germany, with its small population, to become a world leader in sport during the 1970s and 1980s, winning a large number of Olympic and world gold medals and records.\n\nAnother factor for success was the furtherance system for young people in GDR. Sport teachers at school were encouraged to look for certain talents in children ages 6 to 10 years old. For older pupils it was possible to attend grammar schools with a focus on sports (for example sailing, football and swimming). This policy was also used for talented pupils with regard to music or mathematics. \nSports clubs were highly subsidized, especially sports in which it was possible to get international fame. For example, the major leagues for ice hockey and basketball just included each 2 teams. Football was the most popular sport. Club football teams such as Dynamo Dresden, 1. FC Magdeburg, FC Carl Zeiss Jena, 1. FC Lokomotive Leipzig and BFC Dynamo had successes in European competition. Many East German players such as Matthias Sammer and Ulf Kirsten became integral parts of the reunified national football team. Other sports enjoyed great popularity like figure skating, especially because of sportspeople like Katarina Witt. \n\nThe East and the West also competed via sport; GDR athletes dominated several Olympic sports. Of special interest was the only football match between the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic, a first-round match during the 1974 FIFA World Cup, which the East won 1–0; but West Germany, the host, went on to win the World Cup. \n\nTelevision and radio in East Germany were state-run industries; the \"Rundfunk der DDR\" was the official radio broadcasting organisation from 1952 until unification. The organization was based in the \"Funkhaus Nalepastraße\" in East Berlin. \"Deutscher Fernsehfunk\" (DFF), from 1972–1990 known as \"Fernsehen der DDR\" or DDR-FS, was the state television broadcaster from 1952. Reception of Western broadcasts was widespread.\n\nBy the mid-1980s, East Germany possessed a well-developed communications system. There were approximately 3.6 million telephones in usage (21.8 for every 100 inhabitants), and 16,476 Telex stations. Both of these networks were run by the Deutsche Post der DDR (East German Post Office). East Germany was assigned telephone country code +37; in 1991, several months after reunification, East German telephone exchanges were incorporated into country code +49.\n\nAn unusual feature of the telephone network was that, in most cases, direct distance dialing for long-distance calls was not possible. Although area codes were assigned to all major towns and cities, they were only used for switching international calls. Instead, each location had its own list of dialing codes with shorter codes for local calls and longer codes for long-distance calls. After unification, the existing network was largely replaced, and area codes and dialing became standardised.\n\nIn 1976 East Germany inaugurated the operation of a ground-based radio station at Fürstenwalde for the purpose of relaying and receiving communications from Soviet satellites and to serve as a participant in the international telecommunications organization established by the Soviet government, Intersputnik.\n\nMargot Honecker, former Minister for Education of East Germany, summed up its legacy as:\n\nGerman historian Jürgen Kocka in 2010 summarized the consensus of most recent scholarship:\n\nMany East Germans reacted positively to the dissolution of the DDR. But this reaction soon turned sour. West Germans often acted as if they had \"won\" and East Germans had \"lost\" in unification, leading many East Germans (\"Ossis\") to resent West Germans (\"Wessis\"). Writer Ascher Barnstone finds that \"East Germans resent the wealth possessed by West Germans; West Germans see the East Germans as lazy opportunists who want something for nothing. East Germans find \"Wessis\" arrogant and pushy, West Germans think the \"Ossis\" are lazy good-for-nothings.\" On a more fundamental level, unification and subsequent federal policies led to serious economic hardships for many East Germans that had not existed before the Wende. Unemployment and homelessness, which simply did not exist during the socialist era, quickly became widespread; this, as well as the closures of countless factories and other workplaces in the east, fostered a growing sense that East Germans were being ignored or neglected by the federal government.\n\nThese and other effects of unification led many East Germans to begin to think of themselves more strongly as \"East\" Germans rather than as simply \"Germans\". In many former GDR citizens this produced a longing for some aspects of the former East Germany, such as full employment and other perceived benefits of the GDR state, termed \"Ostalgie\" (a blend of \"east\" and \"nostalgia\") and depicted in the Wolfgang Becker film \"Goodbye Lenin!\".\n\nGermany\nArmed Forces\nMedia\nTransport\nOther\n\n\n\n\nCountries of the world Europe\n", "id": "13058", "title": "East Germany"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13060", "text": "Granville, New South Wales\n\nGranville is a suburb in western Sydney, in the state of New South Wales, Australia. Granville is located west of the Sydney central business district, split between the local government areas of Cumberland Council and the City of Parramatta.\n\nSouth Granville is a separate suburb with the distinguishing feature of a light industrial area. Lisgar, Redfern, Heath and Mona Streets form the approximate border between Granville and South Granville. The Duck River provides a boundary with Auburn, to the east.\n\nGranville was named in 1880, after the British Colonial Secretary, the Granville Leveson-Gower, 2nd Earl Granville.\n\nThe area evolved primarily after 1855, when it became the final stop of the first railway line of New South Wales. The Sydney-Parramatta Line ran from Sydney terminus, just south from today's Central railway station to the Granville area which was originally known as 'Parramatta Junction'. This led to the development of this area, which attracted speculators and some local industries.\n\nIn the early days of European settlement, timber was harvested to fuel the steam engines in Sydney and Parramatta. By the 1860s, the supply of timber was exhausted. The remainder was used by scavengers who made a living by collecting firewood. Wattle bark found use with tanners and the bark from stringybark trees was used for roofing of huts. In 1862, a major estate, \"Drainville\", became subject to a mortgagee sale and subdivided for villa homes, and small agricultures. At the end of the decade a Tweed Mill was established, which was steam powered using water from the Duck River. \n\nIn 1878, the locality received its own post office, which was then part of the stationmasters house. In 1880 Parramatta Junction was renamed to Granville, after the British Colonial Secretary, Granville Leveson-Gower, 2nd Earl Granville. The place then had a population of 372, of which 176 were male and 196 female. In this era some German settlers, Joseph Klein and P W Merkell, tried to establish vineyards in the area, but eventually found the land was not suited for this type of agriculture. More farmers discovered the limitations of the local soils and fruit growers complained about the damage from flying foxes. Thus, the only practical use for the grasslands, which replaced the original bushland, was for dairy cattle.\n\nThe Granville Municipality was formed in 1885 and the council carried on the local government of the area until 1948, when it became part of an enlarged City of Parramatta.\n\nOn Anzac Day of 1974, Granville was partially severed by flooding of the Duck Creek stormwater channel due to torrential rain that fell over the area. 135 millimetres of rain fell between 11.30 pm and 12.30 pm at Guildford, with the ensuing flood doing major damage through Granville. The nearby RSL underwent damage and many of the club's old photographs and honour boards were destroyed.\n\nGranville is also the location of the Granville railway disaster, which occurred on 18 January 1977 when a commuter train derailed just before the Bold Street overpass and hit the staunchion, causing the bridge to collapse. 83 people perished, making it the worst rail disaster in Australian history.\n\nGranville has a mixture of residential, commercial and industrial developments. The commercial and residential developments are mostly around Granville railway station and Parramatta Road. Granville is primarily dominated by freestanding weatherboard, fibro and unrendered brick buildings. The area is no longer exactly \"typical\" quarter acre block territory, but blocks are reasonably common. Terraced houses are rare, but increasing in number. Apartment blocks, generally three to four storeys in height, are also becoming more common in the vicinity of the railway station.\n\nBuildings that deserve some attention are:\n\n\nThe \"Crest\" building on the corner of Blaxcell and Redfern Streets, was built by Hoyts in 1948 as a movie theatre and was used for screening movies up until 1963. The structure of the building is of a Quonset hut design, while the facade and interior is of a post-Art Deco and post-Moderne eclectic style, influenced by the \"Picture Palace\" architecture popularly used for movie theatres. It is now used as a function hall.\n\nThe Crest Theatre is now listed in the NSW State Heritage Register as being of \"State significance\", being one of the few cinemas built in Australia in the 1940s. Externally and internally the building remains largely intact, though the signage on the external decorative pier now reads \"B-L-O-U-Z-A\", rather than the original \"H-O-Y-T-S\" (later it was \"B-I-N-G-O\").\n\nGranville railway station is a major station on the South Line and Western Line of the Sydney Trains network. The station is wheelchair accessible. Granville railway station is located on the Main Suburban line. It is served by Sydney Trains T1 Northern and Western Lines and T2 Inner West & South Line services and NSW TrainLink Blue Mountains Line services. Granville's newly built bus interchange, as well as a car park, are located adjacent to its train station. Bike racks and lockers are located nearby. Taxi ranks can be found just south of the train station.\n\nGranville is serviced by Transdev NSW and features a newly built bus interchange. Transdev NSW operates three bus routes via Granville railway station:\n\nGranville station is served by one NightRide (Night Bus) route:\n\nParramatta Road has always been an important thoroughfare for Sydney from its earliest days. From Parramatta the major western road for the state is the Great Western Highway.\nThe M4 Western Motorway, running parallel to the Great Western Highway has taken much of the traffic away from these roads, with entrance and exit ramps close to Parramatta.\n\nGranville has a major college of Technical and Further Education, which is part of the South Western Sydney Institute of TAFE. Schools include Granville Boys High School which was founded in 1926, Delany College, Granville Public School, Granville East Public School, Blaxcell Street Public School and Holy Family Catholic School. The suburb is also home to a Cumberland Council branch library.\n\nThe suburb boasts four pubs. The Royal Hotel and the Granville Hotel are located south and north of the railway line respectively. The Rosehill Hotel is located on the northern side of Parramatta Road and the Vauxhall Inn is on the same street on the western edge of Granville on the corner of Woodville Road. Granville is also home to a sub-branch club of the RSL, known as Granville Diggers. Attractions include live music, bingo, karaoke etc.\n\nGranville has an Olympic size pool and a football facility. Historic Garside Park is home to State Super League and Super Youth League club, Granville Rage.\n\nSydney Speedway is a dirt track speedway which opened in 1977 at the old Granville Showground as the Parramatta Speedway. The clay surface caters mainly to Sprintcars and has been home to some of Australia's greatest drivers including ten times Australian Sprintcar Champion Garry Rush, and multiple title holders George Tatnell, his son Brooke Tatnell, and Max Dumesny. The speedway is also the only venue not in North or Central America to host a round of the famous World of Outlaws sprintcar series.\n\nAt the 2011 census, there were 13,989 residents in Granville. More than half of people were born outside of Australia, with the top countries of birth being India, China and Lebanon. Three-quarters of people spoke a language other than English at home. The most common other languages spoken at home were Arabic 18.1%, Cantonese 5.5%, Mandarin 4.8% and Tongan 2.0%. The housing in Granville was evenly spread between detached houses and higher density units or apartments. 46.3% of residents were renting their home and this was higher than the national average of 29.6%.\n\n\n\n", "id": "13060", "title": "Granville, New South Wales"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13062", "text": "Georg Philipp Telemann\n\nGeorg Philipp Telemann ( – 25 June 1767) () was a German Baroque composer and multi-instrumentalist. Almost completely self-taught in music, he became a composer against his family's wishes. After studying in Magdeburg, Zellerfeld, and Hildesheim, Telemann entered the University of Leipzig to study law, but eventually settled on a career in music. He held important positions in Leipzig, Sorau, Eisenach, and Frankfurt before settling in Hamburg in 1721, where he became musical director of the city's five main churches. While Telemann's career prospered, his personal life was always troubled: his first wife died only a few months after their marriage, and his second wife had extramarital affairs and accumulated a large gambling debt before leaving Telemann.\n\nTelemann was and still is one of the most prolific composers in history (at least in terms of surviving oeuvre) and was considered by his contemporaries to be one of the leading German composers of the time—he was compared favorably both to his friend Johann Sebastian Bach, who made Telemann the godfather and namesake of his son Carl Philipp Emanuel, and to George Frideric Handel, whom Telemann also knew personally. Telemann's music incorporates several national styles (French, Italian) and is even at times influenced by Polish popular music. He remained at the forefront of all new musical tendencies and his music is an important link between the late Baroque and early Classical styles.\n\nTelemann was born in Magdeburg, then the capital of the Duchy of Magdeburg, Brandenburg-Prussia. His father Heinrich, deacon at the Church of the Holy Spirit (\"Heilige-Geist-Kirche\"), died when Telemann was four. The future composer received his first music lessons at 10, from a local organist, and became immensely interested in music in general, and composition in particular. Despite opposition from his mother and relatives, who forbade any musical activities, Telemann found it possible to study and compose in secret, even creating an opera at age 12.\n\nIn 1697 After studies at the Domschule in Magdeburg and at a school in Zellerfeld Telemann was sent to the famous Gymnasium Andreanum at Hildesheim, where his musical talent flourished, supported by school authorities, including the rector himself. Telemann was becoming equally adept both at composing and performing, teaching himself flute, oboe, violin, recorder, double bass, and other instruments. In 1701 he graduated from the Gymnasium and went to Leipzig to become a student at the Leipzig University, where he intended to study law. He ended up becoming a professional musician, regularly composing works for Nikolaikirche and even St. Thomas (Thomaskirche). In 1702 he became director of the city's opera house \"Opernhaus auf dem Brühl\", and later music director at the Neukirche. Prodigiously productive, Telemann supplied a wealth of new music for Leipzig, including several operas, one of which was his first major opera, Germanicus. However, he became engaged in a conflict with the cantor of Thomaskirche, Johann Kuhnau. The conflict intensified when Telemann started employing numerous students for his projects, including those that were Kuhnau's, from Thomasschule.\n\nTelemann left Leipzig in 1705 at the age of 24 after receiving an invitation to become Kapellmeister for the court of Count Erdmann II of Promnitz at Sorau (now Żary, in Poland). His career there was cut short in early 1706 by the hostilities of the Great Northern War, and after a short period of travels he entered the service of Duke Johann Wilhelm of Saxe-Eisenach, the city where Johann Sebastian Bach was born. He became \"Konzertmeister\" on 24 December 1708 and Secretary and \"Kapellmeister\" in August 1709. During his tenure at Eisenach Telemann created a very large amount of music: at least four annual cycles of church cantatas, dozens of sonatas and concertos, and other works. In 1709 he married Amalie Louise Juliane Eberlin, lady-in-waiting to the Countess of Promnitz and daughter of the musician Daniel Eberlin. Their daughter was born in January 1711. The mother died soon afterwards, leaving Telemann depressed and distraught.\n\nAfter less than a year he sought another position, and moved to Frankfurt on 18 March 1712 at the age of 31 to become city music director and \"Kapellmeister\" at the Barfüsserkirche. In Frankfurt, he fully gained his mature personal style. Here, as in Leipzig, he was a powerful force in the city's musical life, creating music for two major churches, civic ceremonies, and various city ensembles and musicians. By 1720 he had adopted the use of the da capo aria, which had been adopted by composers such as Domenico Scarlatti. Operas such as Narciso, which was brought to Frankfurt in 1719, written in the Italian idiom of composition, made a mark on Telemann's output.\n\nOn 28 August 1714, three years after his first wife had died, Telemann married his second wife, Maria Catharina Textor, daughter of a Frankfurt council clerk. They eventually had nine children together. This was a source of much personal happiness, and helped him produce compositions. Telemann continued to be extraordinarily productive and successful, even augmenting his income by working for Eisenach employers as a \"Kapellmeister\" \"von Haus aus\", that is, regularly sending new music while not actually living in Eisenach. Telemann's first published works also appeared during the Frankfurt period. His output increased rapidly, for he fervently composed overture-suites and chamber music, most of which is unappreciated. In the latter half of the Frankfurt period, he composed an innovative work, his Viola Concerto in G major, which is twice the length of his violin concertos. Also, here he composed his first choral masterpiece, his Brockes Passion, in 1716.\n\nThe composer, however, was still ambitious and wishing for a better post, so in 1721 he accepted the invitation to work in Hamburg as \"Kantor\" of the Johanneum Lateinschule, and music director of the city's five largest churches. Soon after arrival, Telemann encountered some opposition from church officials who found his secular music and activities to be too much of a distraction for both Telemann himself and the townsfolk. The next year, when Johann Kuhnau died and the city of Leipzig was looking for a new \"Thomaskantor\", Telemann applied for the job and was approved, yet declined after Hamburg authorities agreed to give him a suitable raise. After another candidate, Christoph Graupner, declined, the post went to Johann Sebastian Bach.\nTelemann took little trips outside of Germany at this time. However, later in the Hamburg period he traveled to Paris and stayed for eight months, 1737 into 1738. He heard and was impressed by \"Castor et Pollux\", an opera by French composer Jean-Philippe Rameau. From then on, he incorporated the French operatic style into his vocal works. Before then, his influence was primarily Italian and German. Apart from that, Telemann remained in Hamburg for the rest of his life. A vocal masterpiece of this period is his \"St Luke Passion\" from 1728, which is a prime example of his fully matured vocal style.\n\nHis first years there were plagued by marital troubles: his wife's infidelity, and her gambling debts, which amounted to a sum larger than Telemann's annual income. The composer was saved from bankruptcy by the efforts of his friends, and by the numerous successful music and poetry publications Telemann made during 1725–40. By 1736 husband and wife were no longer living together because of their financial disagreements. Although still active and fulfilling the many duties of his job, Telemann became less productive in the 1740s, for he was in his 60s. He took up theoretical studies, as well as hobbies such as gardening and cultivating exotic plants, something of a fad in Hamburg at that time, and a hobby shared by Handel. \nMost of the music of the 1750s appears to have been parodied from earlier works. Telemann's eldest son Andreas died in 1755, and Andreas' son Georg Michael Telemann was raised by the aging composer. Troubled by health problems and failing eyesight in his last years, Telemann was still composing into the 1760s. He died on the evening of 25 June 1767 from what was recorded at the time as a \"chest ailment.\" He was succeeded at his Hamburg post by his godson, Johann Sebastian Bach's second son Carl Philipp Emmanuel Bach.\n\nTelemann was one of the most prolific major composers of all time: his all-encompassing oeuvre comprises more than 3,000 compositions, half of which have been lost, and most of which have not been performed since the 18th century. From 1708 to 1750, Telemann composed 1,043 sacred cantatas and 600 overture-suites, and types of concertos for combinations of instruments that no other composer of the time composed. The first accurate estimate of the number of his works was provided by musicologists only during the 1980s and 1990s, when extensive thematic catalogues were published. During his lifetime and the latter half of the 18th century, Telemann was very highly regarded by colleagues and critics alike. Numerous theorists (Marpurg, Mattheson, Quantz, and Scheibe, among others) cited his works as models, and major composers such as J.S. Bach and Handel bought and studied his published works. He was immensely popular not only in Germany but also in the rest of Europe: orders for editions of Telemann's music came from France, Italy, the Netherlands, Belgium, Scandinavian countries, Switzerland, and Spain. It was only in the early 19th century that his popularity came to a sudden halt. Most lexicographers started dismissing him as a \"polygraph\" who composed too many works, a \"Vielschreiber\" for whom quantity came before quality. Such views were influenced by an account of Telemann's music by Christoph Daniel Ebeling, a late-18th-century critic who in fact praised Telemann's music and made only passing critical remarks of his productivity. After the Bach revival, Telemann's works were judged as inferior to Bach's and lacking in deep religious feeling. For example, by 1911, the Encyclopædia Britannica lacked an article about Telemann, and in one of its few mentions of him referred to \"the vastly inferior work of lesser composers such as Telemann\" in comparison to Handel and Bach.\n\nParticularly striking examples of such judgements were produced by noted Bach biographers Philipp Spitta and Albert Schweitzer, who criticized Telemann's cantatas and then praised works they thought were composed by Bach, but which were composed by Telemann. The last performance of a substantial work by Telemann (\"Der Tod Jesu\") occurred in 1832, and it was not until the 20th century that his music started being performed again. The revival of interest in Telemann began in the first decades of the 20th century and culminated in the Bärenreiter critical edition of the 1950s. Today each of Telemann's works is usually given a TWV number, which stands for \"Telemann-Werke-Verzeichnis\" (Telemann Works Catalogue).\n\nTelemann's music was one of the driving forces behind the late Baroque and the early Classical styles. Starting in the 1710s he became one of the creators and foremost exponents of the so-called German mixed style, an amalgam of German, French, Italian and Polish styles. Over the years, his music gradually changed and started incorporating more and more elements of the galant style, but he never completely adopted the ideals of the nascent Classical era: Telemann's style remained contrapuntally and harmonically complex, and already in 1751 he dismissed much contemporary music as too simplistic. Composers he influenced musically included pupils of J.S. Bach in Leipzig, such as Wilhelm Friedemann Bach, Carl Philipp Emmanuel Bach and Johann Friedrich Agricola, as well as those composers who performed under his direction in Leipzig (Christoph Graupner, Johann David Heinichen and Johann Georg Pisendel), composers of the Berlin \"lieder\" school, and finally, his numerous pupils, none of whom, however, became major composers. His music deserves a place equal to Bach and Handel's, as the epitome of the high Baroque style, and even an impetus behind the early classical style developed in the works of Giovanni Batista Sammartini and Joseph Haydn.\n\nEqually important for the history of music were Telemann's publishing activities. By pursuing exclusive publication rights for his works, he set one of the most important early precedents for regarding music as the intellectual property of the composer. The same attitude informed his public concerts, where Telemann would frequently perform music originally composed for ceremonies attended only by a select few members of the upper class.\n\nSee List of operas by Telemann\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "13062", "title": "Georg Philipp Telemann"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13064", "text": "Granville rail disaster\n\nThe Granville rail disaster occurred on Tuesday 18 January 1977 at Granville, a western suburb of Sydney, Australia, when a crowded commuter train derailed, running into the supports of a road bridge that collapsed onto two of the train's passenger carriages. It is the worst rail disaster in Australian history: 84 people died, more than 210 were injured, and 1,300 were affected.\n\nThe crowded Sydney-bound eight carriage commuter train, having left Mount Victoria in the Blue Mountains at 6:09am, was hauled by a New South Wales 46 class locomotive, No. 4620. It was approaching Granville railway station when it left the rails at approximately 08:10am and hit a row of supports of the overhead Bold Street bridge, which were constructed of steel and concrete.\n\nThe derailed engine and first two carriages passed the bridge. The first carriage broke free from the other carriages. Carriage one was torn open when it collided with a severed mast beside the track, killing eight passengers. The remaining carriages ground to a halt with the second carriage clear of the bridge. The rear half of the third carriage, and forward half of the fourth carriage, came to rest under the weakened bridge, whose weight was estimated at . Within seconds, with all its supports demolished, the bridge and several motor cars on top of it crashed onto the carriages, crushing them and the passengers inside. \nOf the total number of passengers travelling in the third and fourth carriages, half were killed instantly when the bridge collapsed on them, crushing them in their seats. Several injured passengers were trapped in the train for hours after the accident, with part of the bridge crushing a limb or torso. Some had been conscious and lucid, talking to rescuers, but died of crush syndrome soon after the weight was removed from their bodies. This resulted in changes to rescue procedures for these kinds of accidents. Rescuers also faced greater difficulties as the weight of the bridge was still crushing the affected carriages, reducing the space in which they had to work to get survivors out, until it was declared that no one was allowed to attempt further entry until the bridge had been lifted. That the bridge split while being lifted and collapsed back onto the train did not make things any easier.\n\nAnother danger came from gas; large gas cylinders were kept year-round on board the train to be used in winter for heating. Several people were overcome by gas leaking from ruptured cylinders. The leaking gas also prevented the immediate use of powered rescue tools. The NSW Fire Brigade provided ventilation equipment to dispel the gas and a constant film of water was sprayed over the accident site to prevent the possibility of the gas igniting.\n\nThe train driver, the assistant crewman, the \"second man\", and the motorists driving on the fallen bridge all survived. The operation lasted from 8:12am Tuesday until 6:00am Thursday. Ultimately, 83 people were killed in the accident.\nThe bridge was rebuilt as a single span without any intermediate support piers. Other bridges similar to the destroyed bridge had their piers reinforced.\nThe inquiry into the accident found that the primary cause of the crash was \"the very unsatisfactory condition of the permanent way\", being the poor fastening of the track, causing the track to spread and allowing the left front wheel of the locomotive to come off the rail. How this happened was related to a high turnover of staff combined with a lack of standard procedures for track inspections. The posted speed limit for the track was not shown to be excessive, provided appropriate track inspection and maintenance was occurring.\n\nOther contributing factors included the structure of the bridge itself. When built, it was found to be one metre lower than the road. Concrete was added on top to build the surface up level with the road. This additional weight significantly added to the destruction of the wooden train carriages. The disaster caused substantial increases in rail-maintenance expenditure. The train driver, Edward Olencewicz, was exonerated by the inquiry.\nAccording to a book authored by Barry Gobbe, Revisiting the Granville Train Disaster of 1977, published in 2015, the locomotive had a defective wheel that the government knew about and later covered up.\n\nThe Granville Memorial Trust was established after the accident to commemorate the victims and campaign for improvements to rail safety.\n\nThe Trust organises an annual memorial service on the anniversary of the crash. Families and friends of the victims gather with surviving members of the rescue crews in a march through Granville to the Bold Street bridge where the accident occurred. The ceremony ends with the throwing of 83 roses on to the tracks to mark the number of passengers killed. In 2007, a plaque was placed atop the bridge to mark the efforts of railway workers who assisted in rescuing survivors from the train.\n\nTrust members also make submissions on rail safety issues, including recommending that fines for safety breaches be dedicated to rail safety improvements, and campaigning for the establishment of an independent railway safety ombudsman.\n\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "13064", "title": "Granville rail disaster"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13066", "text": "George Gershwin\n\nGeorge Jacob Gershwin (; September 26, 1898 July 11, 1937) was an American composer and pianist. Gershwin's compositions spanned both popular and classical genres, and his most popular melodies are widely known. Among his best-known works are the orchestral compositions \"Rhapsody in Blue\" (1924) and \"An American in Paris\" (1928) as well as the opera \"Porgy and Bess\" (1935).\n\nGershwin studied piano under Charles Hambitzer and composition with Rubin Goldmark, Henry Cowell and Joseph Brody. He began his career as a song plugger, but soon started composing Broadway theatre works with his brother Ira Gershwin, and Buddy DeSylva. He moved to Paris intending to study with Nadia Boulanger, who refused him, where he began to compose \"An American in Paris\". After returning to New York City, he wrote \"Porgy and Bess\" with Ira and the author DuBose Heyward. Initially a commercial failure, \"Porgy and Bess\" is now considered one of the most important American operas of the twentieth century.\n\nGershwin moved to Hollywood and composed numerous film scores until his death in 1937 from a malignant brain tumor – glioblastoma multiforme.\n\nGershwin's compositions have been adapted for use in many films and for television, and several became jazz standards recorded in many variations. Many celebrated singers and musicians have covered his songs.\n\nGershwin was of Russian Jewish and Ukrainian Jewish descent. His grandfather, Jakov Gershowitz, had served for 25 years as a mechanic for the Imperial Russian Army to earn the right of free travel and residence as a Jew. He retired near Saint Petersburg. His teenage son, Moishe Gershowitz, worked as a leather cutter for women's shoes. Moishe met and fell in love with Roza Bruskina, the teenage daughter of a furrier, born in Vilnius. Bruskina moved with her family to New York due to fears of an increasing anti-Jewish sentiment in Russia; once re-settled, she Americanized her first name to Rose. Moishe, faced with compulsory military service in Russia, followed Rose as soon as he had the means to. Upon arrival in New York, Moishe Gershowitz used the first name Morris. Moishe (Morris) settled at first with a maternal uncle in Brooklyn: a tailor named Greenstein, where he worked as a foreman in a women's shoe factory. When Morris and Rose married on July 21, 1895, they were 23 and 19, respectively. At some time between 1893 and 1898, Moishe (Morris) Gershowitz changed his surname to Gershwine – even possibly at, or around, the time of his marriage to Roza.\n\nThe first child to the new couple was Ira (given the name 'Israel'), on December 6, 1896. It was about that time that Morris moved the family to Brooklyn, to a second-floor dwelling at 242 Snediker Avenue. George Gershwin was born at the new residence on September 26, 1898; his birth certificate bears the name Jacob Gershwine, with the surname being commonly pronounced 'Gersh-vin' by the predominantly expatriate Russian and Yiddish community. George was named after his late grandfather (the Russian army mechanic). However, although the common American practice was to give children two names – a first and a middle name – he had no other name but 'George'. Years later, George changed the spelling of his surname to 'Gershwin' after he became a professional musician; subsequently, other members of his family followed suit.\n\nGeorge and Ira lived in many different residences, as their father changed dwellings with each new enterprise with which he became involved. Mostly, the boys grew up around the Yiddish Theater District. They frequented the local Yiddish theaters, with George occasionally appearing onstage as an extra.\n\nAfter Ira and George, two more children were born to the family: Arthur (1900–1981), and Frances (1906–1999).\n\nGeorge lived a usual childhood existence for children of New York tenements – running around with his boyhood friends, roller skating and misbehaving in the streets. Remarkably, he cared nothing for music until the age of ten, when he was intrigued by what he heard at his friend Maxie Rosenzweig's violin recital. The sound, and the way his friend played, captured him. His parents had bought a piano for lessons for his older brother Ira, but to his parents' surprise, and Ira's relief, it was George who spent more time playing it. Although his younger sister Frances Gershwin was the first in the family to make a living through her musical talents, she married young and devoted herself to being a mother and housewife - thus surrendering any serious time to musical endeavors. Frances, having given up her performing career, did however settle upon another art: painting, as a creative outlet. Painting had also been a hobby George briefly pursued. Arthur Gershwin followed in the paths of George and Ira, when he also became a composer of songs, musicals, and short piano works.\n\nWith a degree of frustration, George tried various piano teachers for some two years, before finally being introduced to Charles Hambitzer by Jack Miller, the pianist in the Beethoven Symphony Orchestra. Until his death in 1918, Hambitzer remained Gershwin's musical mentor and taught him conventional piano technique, introduced him to music of the European classical tradition, and encouraged him to attend orchestral concerts. At home, following such concerts, young Gershwin would essentially try to play, at the piano, the music that he had heard - completely from recall, and without sheet music. As a matter of course, Gershwin later studied with the classical composer Rubin Goldmark and avant-garde composer-theorist Henry Cowell, thus formalizing his classical music training.\n\nOn leaving school at the age of 15, Gershwin found his first job as a \"song plugger\" for Jerome H. Remick and Company, a Detroit-based publishing firm with a branch office on New York City's Tin Pan Alley, where he earned $15 a week. His first published song was \"When You Want 'Em, You Can't Get 'Em, When You've Got 'Em, You Don't Want 'Em\". It was published in 1916 when Gershwin was only 17 years old and earned him 50 cents. His 1917 novelty rag, \"Rialto Ripples\", was a commercial success, and in 1919 he scored his first big national hit with his song, \"Swanee\", with words by Irving Caesar. Al Jolson, a famous Broadway singer of the day, heard Gershwin perform \"Swanee\" at a party and decided to sing it in one of his shows.\n\nIn 1916, Gershwin started working for Aeolian Company and Standard Music Rolls in New York, recording and arranging. He produced dozens, if not hundreds, of rolls under his own and assumed names (pseudonyms attributed to Gershwin include Fred Murtha and Bert Wynn). He also recorded rolls of his own compositions for the Duo-Art and Welte-Mignon reproducing pianos. As well as recording piano rolls, Gershwin made a brief foray into vaudeville, accompanying both Nora Bayes and Louise Dresser on the piano.\n\nIn the late 1910s, Gershwin met songwriter and music director William Daly. The two collaborated on the Broadway musicals \"Piccadilly to Broadway\" (1920) and \"For Goodness' Sake\" (1922), and jointly composed the score for \"Our Nell\" (1923). This was the beginning of a long friendship; Daly was a frequent arranger, orchestrator and conductor of Gershwin's music, and Gershwin periodically turned to him for musical advice.\n\nIn the early 1920s, Gershwin frequently worked with the lyricist Buddy DeSylva. Together they created the experimental one-act jazz opera \"Blue Monday,\" set in Harlem. It is widely regarded as a forerunner to the groundbreaking \"Porgy and Bess\". In 1924, George and Ira Gershwin collaborated on a stage musical comedy \"Lady Be Good\", which included such future standards as \"Fascinating Rhythm\" and \"Oh, Lady Be Good!\". They followed this with \"Oh, Kay!\" (1926); \"Funny Face\" (1927); \"Strike Up the Band\" (1927 and 1930). Gershwin gave the song, with a modified title, to UCLA to be used as a football fight song, \"Strike Up The Band for UCLA\".\n\nThe Gershwin brothers created \"Show Girl\" (1929); \"Girl Crazy\" (1930), which introduced the standards \"Embraceable You\", debuted by Ginger Rogers; \"I Got Rhythm\", and \"Of Thee I Sing\" (1931), which was the first musical comedy to win the Pulitzer Prize for Drama; the winners were George S. Kaufman, Morrie Ryskind, and Ira Gershwin.\n\nIn 1924, Gershwin composed his first major classical work, \"Rhapsody in Blue\", for orchestra and piano. It was orchestrated by Ferde Grofé and premiered by Paul Whiteman's concert band in New York. It proved to be his most popular work.\n\nIn the mid-1920s, Gershwin stayed in Paris for a short period of time, during which he applied to study composition with the noted Nadia Boulanger, who, along with several other prospective tutors such as Maurice Ravel, rejected him. They were afraid that rigorous classical study would ruin his jazz-influenced style. Maurice Ravel's rejection letter to Gershwin told him, \"Why become a second-rate Ravel when you're already a first-rate Gershwin?\" While there, Gershwin wrote \"An American in Paris\". This work received mixed reviews upon its first performance at Carnegie Hall on December 13, 1928, but it quickly became part of the standard repertoire in Europe and the United States. Growing tired of the Parisian musical scene, Gershwin returned to the United States.\n\nIn 1929, Gershwin was contracted by Fox Film Corporation to compose the score for the movie \"Delicious\". Only two pieces were used in the final film, the five-minute \"Dream Sequence\" and the six-minute \"Manhattan Rhapsody,\" which in expanded form was later published as the \"Second Rhapsody\". Gershwin became infuriated when the rest of the score was rejected by Fox Film Corporation, and it would be seven years before he worked in Hollywood again.\n\nGershwin's first opera, \"Blue Monday\", is a short one-act opera which was not a financial success and has received only limited performances. Gershwin's most ambitious composition was \"Porgy and Bess\" (1935). Gershwin called it a \"folk opera\", and it is now widely regarded as one of the most important American operas of the twentieth century.\n\"From the very beginning, it was considered another American classic by the composer of 'Rhapsody in Blue'—even if critics couldn't quite figure out how to evaluate it. Was it opera, or was it simply an ambitious Broadway musical? 'It crossed the barriers,' says theater historian Robert Kimball. 'It wasn't a musical work per se, and it wasn't a drama per se – it elicited response from both music and drama critics. But the work has sort of always been outside category.\"\n\nBased on the novel \"Porgy\" by DuBose Heyward, the action takes place in the fictional, colored neighborhood of Catfish Row, Charleston, South Carolina. With the exception of several minor speaking roles, all of the characters are African-American. The music combines elements of popular music of the day, with a strong influence of African-American music, of the period, with techniques typical of opera, such as recitative, through-composition and an extensive system of leitmotifs. \"Porgy and Bess\" contains some of Gershwin's most sophisticated music, including a fugue, a passacaglia, the use of atonality, polytonality and polyrhythm, and a tone row. Even the \"set numbers\" (of which \"Summertime\", \"I Got Plenty o' Nuttin'\" and \"It Ain't Necessarily So\" are well known examples) are some of the most refined and ingenious of Gershwin's compositions. For the performances, Gershwin collaborated with Eva Jessye, whom he picked as the musical director. One of the outstanding musical alumnae of Western University in Kansas, she had created her own choir in New York and performed widely with them. The work was first performed in 1935; it was a box-office failure in the middle of the Great Depression. The musical has since been recognized as one of the greatest musical and theatrical compositions of the 20th Century.\n\nAfter the commercial failure of \"Porgy and Bess\", Gershwin moved to Hollywood, California. He was commissioned by RKO Pictures in 1936 to write the music for the film \"Shall We Dance\", starring Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers. Gershwin's extended score, which would marry ballet with jazz in a new way, runs over an hour in length. It took Gershwin several months to compose and orchestrate.\n\nGershwin had a ten-year affair with composer Kay Swift, whom he frequently consulted about his music. The two never married, although she eventually divorced her husband James Warburg in order to commit to the relationship. Swift's granddaughter, Katharine Weber, has suggested that the pair were not married because George's mother Rose was \"unhappy that Kay Swift wasn't Jewish\". \"Oh, Kay\" was named for her. After Gershwin's death, Swift arranged some of his music, transcribed several of his recordings, and collaborated with his brother Ira on several projects.\n\nEarly in 1937, Gershwin began to complain of blinding headaches and a recurring impression that he smelled burning rubber. On February 11, 1937, Gershwin performed his Piano Concerto in F in a special concert of his music with the San Francisco Symphony Orchestra under the direction of French maestro Pierre Monteux. Gershwin, normally a superb pianist in his own compositions, suffered coordination problems and blackouts during the performance. He was at the time living with his brother Ira, and Ira's wife Leonore in a rented house in Beverly Hills while they worked on other Hollywood film projects. Leonore Gershwin began to be disturbed by George's mood swings and his seeming inability to eat without spilling food at the dinner table. She suspected the onset of mental illness and she insisted he be moved out of their house to lyricist Yip Harburg's empty quarters nearby, where he was placed in the care of his valet, Paul Mueller. The headaches and olfactory hallucinations continued, and on June 23, after an incident in which Gershwin tried to push Mueller out of the car in which they were riding, Gershwin was admitted to Cedars of Lebanon Hospital in Los Angeles for observation. Tests showed no physical cause and he was released on the 26th with a diagnosis of \"likely hysteria.\" His troubles with coordination and mental acuity worsened, and on the night of July 9, Gershwin collapsed in Harburg's house, where he had been working on the score of \"The Goldwyn Follies\". He was rushed back to Cedars of Lebanon, where he fell into a coma. Only at that point did it become obvious to his doctors that he was suffering from a brain tumor. Leonore called George's close friend Emil Mosbacher and explained the dire need to find a neurosurgeon. Mosbacher immediately called pioneering neurosurgeon Dr. Harvey Cushing in Boston, who, retired for several years by then, recommended Dr. Walter Dandy, who was on a boat fishing in Chesapeake Bay with the governor of Maryland. Mosbacher then called the White House and had a Coast Guard cutter sent to find the governor's yacht and bring Dandy quickly to shore. Mosbacher then chartered a plane and flew Dandy to Newark Airport, where he was to catch a plane to Los Angeles; however, by that time, Gershwin's condition was judged to be critical and the need for surgery immediate. An attempt by doctors at Cedars to excise the tumor was made in the early hours of the 11th, but it proved unsuccessful, and Gershwin died on the morning of July 11, 1937, at the age of 38.\n\nGershwin's many friends and fans were shocked and devastated. John O'Hara remarked: \"George Gershwin died on July 11, 1937, but I don't have to believe it if I don't want to.\" He was interred at Westchester Hills Cemetery in Hastings-on-Hudson, New York. A memorial concert was held at the Hollywood Bowl on September 8, 1937, at which Otto Klemperer conducted his own orchestration of the second of Gershwin's \"Three Preludes\".\n\nGershwin received his sole Academy Award nomination for Best Original Song at the 1937 Oscars for \"They Can't Take That Away from Me\", written with his brother Ira for the 1937 film \"Shall We Dance\". The nomination was posthumous; Gershwin died two months after the film's release.\n\nGershwin was influenced by French composers of the early twentieth century. In turn Maurice Ravel was impressed with Gershwin's abilities, commenting, \"Personally I find jazz most interesting: the rhythms, the way the melodies are handled, the melodies themselves. I have heard of George Gershwin's works and I find them intriguing.\" The orchestrations in Gershwin's symphonic works often seem similar to those of Ravel; likewise, Ravel's two piano concertos evince an influence of Gershwin.\n\nGershwin asked to study with Ravel. When Ravel heard how much Gershwin earned, Ravel replied with words to the effect of, \"You should give \"me\" lessons.\" (Some versions of this story feature Igor Stravinsky rather than Ravel as the composer; however Stravinsky confirmed that he originally heard the story from Ravel.)\n\nGershwin's own \"Concerto in F\" was criticized for being related to the work of Claude Debussy, more so than to the expected jazz style. The comparison did not deter Gershwin from continuing to explore French styles. The title of \"An American in Paris\" reflects the very journey that he had consciously taken as a composer: \"The opening part will be developed in typical French style, in the manner of Debussy and \"Les Six\", though the tunes are original.\"\n\nAside from the French influence, Gershwin was intrigued by the works of Alban Berg, Dmitri Shostakovich, Igor Stravinsky, Darius Milhaud, and Arnold Schoenberg. He also asked Schoenberg for composition lessons. Schoenberg refused, saying \"I would only make you a bad Schoenberg, and you're such a good Gershwin already.\" (This quote is similar to one credited to Maurice Ravel during Gershwin's 1928 visit to France – \"Why be a second-rate Ravel, when you are a first-rate Gershwin?\") Gershwin was particularly impressed by the music of Berg, who gave him a score of the \"Lyric Suite\". He attended the American premiere of \"Wozzeck\", conducted by Leopold Stokowski in 1931, and was \"thrilled and deeply impressed\".\n\nRussian Joseph Schillinger's influence as Gershwin's teacher of composition (1932–1936) was substantial in providing him with a method of composition. There has been some disagreement about the nature of Schillinger's influence on Gershwin. After the posthumous success of \"Porgy and Bess\", Schillinger claimed he had a large and direct influence in overseeing the creation of the opera; Ira completely denied that his brother had any such assistance for this work. A third account of Gershwin's musical relationship with his teacher was written by Gershwin's close friend Vernon Duke, also a Schillinger student, in an article for \"the Musical Quarterly\" in 1947.\n\nWhat set Gershwin apart was his ability to manipulate forms of music into his own unique voice. He took the jazz he discovered on Tin Pan Alley into the mainstream by splicing its rhythms and tonality with that of the popular songs of his era. Although George Gershwin would seldom make grand statements about his music, he believed that \"true music must reflect the thought and aspirations of the people and time. My people are Americans. My time is today.\"\n\nIn 2007, the Library of Congress named their Prize for Popular Song after George and Ira Gershwin. Recognizing the profound and positive effect of popular music on culture, the prize is given annually to a composer or performer whose lifetime contributions exemplify the standard of excellence associated with the Gershwins. On March 1, 2007, the first Gershwin Prize was awarded to Paul Simon.\n\nEarly in his career, under both his own name and pseudonyms, Gershwin recorded more than one hundred and forty player piano rolls which were a main source of his income. The majority were popular music of the period and a smaller proportion were of his own works. Once his musical theatre-writing income became substantial, his regular roll-recording career became superfluous. He did record additional rolls throughout the 1920s of his main hits for the Aeolian Company's reproducing piano, including a complete version of his \"Rhapsody in Blue\".\n\nCompared to the piano rolls, there are few accessible audio recordings of Gershwin's playing. His first recording was his own \"Swanee\" with the Fred Van Eps Trio in 1919. The recorded balance highlights the banjo playing of Van Eps, and the piano is overshadowed. The recording took place before \"Swanee\" became famous as an Al Jolson specialty in early 1920.\n\nGershwin recorded an abridged version of \"Rhapsody in Blue\" with Paul Whiteman and his orchestra for the Victor Talking Machine Company in 1924, soon after the world premiere. Gershwin and the same orchestra made an electrical recording of the abridged version for Victor in 1927. However, a dispute in the studio over interpretation angered Paul Whiteman and he left. The conductor's baton was taken over by Victor's staff conductor Nathaniel Shilkret.\n\nGershwin made a number of solo piano recordings of tunes from his musicals, some including the vocals of Fred and Adele Astaire, as well as his \"Three Preludes\" for piano. In 1929, Gershwin \"supervised\" the world premiere recording of \"An American in Paris\" with Nathaniel Shilkret and the Victor Symphony Orchestra. Gershwin's role in the recording was rather limited, particularly because Shilkret was conducting and had his own ideas about the music. When it was realized that no one had been hired to play the brief celeste solo, Gershwin was asked if he could and would play the instrument, and he agreed. Gershwin can be heard, rather briefly, on the recording during the slow section.\n\nGershwin appeared on several radio programs, including Rudy Vallee's, and played some of his compositions. This included the third movement of the \"Concerto in F\" with Vallee conducting the studio orchestra. Some of these performances were preserved on transcription discs and have been released on LP and CD.\n\nIn 1934, in an effort to earn money to finance his planned folk opera, Gershwin hosted his own radio program titled \"Music by Gershwin\". The show was broadcast on the NBC Blue Network from February to May and again in September through the final show on December 23, 1934. He presented his own work as well as the work of other composers. Recordings from this and other radio broadcasts include his \"Variations on I Got Rhythm\", portions of the \"Concerto in F\", and numerous songs from his musical comedies. He also recorded a run-through of his \"Second Rhapsody\", conducting the orchestra and playing the piano solos. Gershwin recorded excerpts from \"Porgy and Bess\" with members of the original cast, conducting the orchestra from the keyboard; he even announced the selections and the names of the performers. In 1935 RCA Victor asked him to supervise recordings of highlights from \"Porgy and Bess\"; these were his last recordings.\n\nA 74-second newsreel film clip of Gershwin playing \"I Got Rhythm\" has survived, filmed at the opening of the Manhattan Theater (now The Ed Sullivan Theater) in August 1931. There are also silent home movies of Gershwin, some of them shot on Kodachrome color film stock, which have been featured in tributes to the composer. In addition, there is newsreel footage of Gershwin playing \"Mademoiselle from New Rochelle\" and \"Strike Up the Band\" on the piano during a Broadway rehearsal of the 1930 production of \"Strike Up the Band\". In the mid-30s, \"Strike Up The Band\" was given to UCLA to be used as a football fight song, \"Strike Up The Band for UCLA\". The comedy team of Clark and McCullough are seen conversing with Gershwin, then singing as he plays.\n\nIn 1945, the film biography Rhapsody in Blue was made, starring Robert Alda as George Gershwin. The film contains many factual errors about Gershwin's life, but also features many examples of his music, including an almost complete performance of \"Rhapsody in Blue\".\n\nIn 1965, Movietone Records released an album MTM 1009 featuring Gershwin's piano rolls of the titled \"George Gerswhin plays RHAPSODY IN BLUE and his other favorite compositions\". The B-side of the LP featured nine other recordings.\n\nIn 1975, Columbia Records released an album featuring Gershwin's piano rolls of \"Rhapsody In Blue\", accompanied by the Columbia Jazz Band playing the original jazz band accompaniment, conducted by Michael Tilson Thomas. The B-side of the Columbia Masterworks release features Tilson Thomas leading the New York Philharmonic in \"An American In Paris.\"\nIn 1976, RCA Records, as part of its \"Victrola Americana\" line, released a collection of Gershwin recordings taken from 78s recorded in the 1920s and called the LP \"Gershwin plays Gershwin, Historic First Recordings\" (RCA Victrola AVM1-1740). Included were recordings of \"Rhapsody in Blue\" with the Paul Whiteman Orchestra and Gershwin on piano; \"An American in Paris\", from 1927 with Gershwin on celesta; and \"Three Preludes\", \"Clap Yo' Hands\" and Someone to Watch Over Me\", among others. There are a total of ten recordings on the album. At the opening ceremony of the 1984 Olympic Games in Los Angeles, \"Rhapsody in Blue\" was performed in spectacular fashion by many pianists.\n\nThe soundtrack to Woody Allen's 1979 film \"Manhattan\" is composed entirely of Gershwin's compositions, including \"Rhapsody in Blue\", \"Love is Sweeping the Country\", and \"But Not for Me\", performed by both the New York Philharmonic under Zubin Mehta and the Buffalo Philharmonic under Michael Tilson Thomas. The film begins with a monologue by Allen: \"He adored New York City ... To him, no matter what the season was, this was still a town that existed in black and white and pulsated to the great tunes of George Gershwin.\"\n\nIn 1998, two audio CDs featuring piano rolls recorded by Gershwin were issued by Nonesuch Records through the efforts of Artis Woodhouse; and entitled \"\".\n\nIn October 2009, it was reported by \"Rolling Stone\" that Brian Wilson was completing at least two unfinished compositions by George Gershwin for possible release in 2010. \"Brian Wilson Reimagines Gershwin\" was released on August 17, 2010. The album consists of ten George and Ira Gershwin songs, bookended by passages from \"Rhapsody in Blue\", along with two new songs completed from unfinished Gershwin fragments by Wilson and band member Scott Bennett.\n\nBaseline Studio Systems announced in January 2010 that Steven Spielberg may direct a biopic about the composer's life; 32-year-old American actor Zachary Quinto was named for the leading role of George Gershwin.\n\n Orchestral \nSolo Piano\nOperas\nLondon Musicals\nBroadway Musicals\nFilms for which Gershwin wrote original scores\n\nGershwin died intestate, and his estate passed to his mother. The estate continues to collect significant royalties from licensing the copyrights on his work. The estate supported the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act because its 1923 cutoff date was shortly before Gershwin had begun to create his most popular works. The copyrights on all Gershwin's solo works expired at the end of 2007 in the European Union, based on its life-plus-70-years rule.\n\nIn 2005, \"The Guardian\" determined using \"estimates of earnings accrued in a composer's lifetime\" that George Gershwin was the wealthiest composer of all time.\n\nIn September 2013, a partnership between the estates of Ira and George Gershwin and the University of Michigan was created and will provide the university's School of Music, Theatre, and Dance access to Gershwin's entire body of work, which includes all of Gershwin's papers, compositional drafts, and scores. This direct access to all of his works will provide opportunities to musicians, composers, and scholars to analyze and reinterpret his work with the goal of accurately reflecting the composers' vision in order to preserve his legacy. The first fascicles of \"The Gershwin Critical Edition\", edited by Mark Clague, are expected in 2017; they will cover the 1924 jazz band version of \"Rhapsody in Blue\", \"An American in Paris\" and \"Porgy and Bess\".\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "13066", "title": "George Gershwin"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13068", "text": "Grammatical gender\n\nIn linguistics, grammatical gender is a specific form of noun-class system in which the division of noun classes forms an agreement system with another aspect of the language, such as adjectives, articles, pronouns, or verbs. This system is used in approximately one quarter of the world's languages. In these languages, most or all nouns inherently carry one value of the grammatical category called \"gender\"; the values present in a given language (of which there are usually two or three) are called the \"genders\" of that language. According to one definition: \"Genders are classes of nouns reflected in the behaviour of associated words.\"\n\nCommon gender divisions include masculine and feminine; masculine, feminine and neuter; or animate and inanimate. In a few languages, the gender assignment of nouns is solely determined by their meaning or attributes, like biological sex, humanness, animacy. However, in most languages, this semantic division is only partially valid, and many nouns may belong to a gender category that contrasts with their meaning (e.g. the word for \"manliness\" could be of feminine gender). In this case, the gender assignment can also be influenced by the morphology or phonology of the noun, or in some cases can be apparently arbitrary.\n\nGrammatical gender manifests itself when words related to a noun like determiners, pronouns or adjectives change their form (\"inflect\") according to the gender of noun they refer to (\"agreement\"). The parts of speech affected by gender agreement, the circumstances in which it occurs, and the way words are marked for gender vary between languages. Gender inflection may interact with other grammatical categories like number or case. In some languages the declension pattern followed by the noun itself will be different for different genders.\n\nGrammatical gender is found in many Indo-European languages (including Latin, Spanish, French, Russian, and German—but not Persian, for example), Afroasiatic languages (which includes the Semitic and Berber languages, etc.), and in other language families such as Dravidian and Northeast Caucasian, as well as several Australian Aboriginal languages such as Dyirbal, and Kalaw Lagaw Ya. Most Niger–Congo languages also have extensive systems of noun classes, which can be grouped into several grammatical genders. Conversely, grammatical gender is usually absent from the Altaic, Austronesian, Sino-Tibetan, Uralic and most Native American language families. Modern English is not considered to have grammatical gender, although Old English had it, and some remnants of a gender system exist, such as the distinct personal pronouns \"he\", \"she\", and \"it\". However, aside from a handful of nouns such as \"god\" and \"goddess\", \"duke\" and \"duchess\", \"tiger\" and \"tigress\", and \"waiter\" and \"waitress\", gender is found almost exclusively in pronouns and titles.\n\nIn languages with grammatical gender, each noun is assigned to one of the classes called \"genders\", which form a closed set. Most such languages usually have from two to four different genders, but some are attested with up to 20.\n\nThe division into genders usually correlates to some degree, at least for a certain set of nouns (such as those denoting humans), with some property or properties of the things that particular nouns denote. Such properties include animacy or inanimacy, \"humanness\" or non-humanness, and biological sex.\n\nFew or no nouns can occur in more than one class. Depending on the language and the word, this assignment might bear some relationship with the meaning of the noun (e.g. \"woman\" is usually feminine), or may be arbitrary.\n\nGender is considered an inherent quality of nouns, and it affects the forms of other related words, a process called agreement. Nouns may be considered the \"triggers\" of the process, whereas other words will be the \"target\" of these changes.\n\nThese related words can be, depending on the language: determiners, pronouns, numerals, quantifiers, possessives, adjectives, past and passive participles, verbs, adverbs, complementizers, and adpositions. Gender class may be marked on the noun itself, but will also always be marked on other constituents in a noun phrase or sentence. If the noun is explicitly marked, both trigger and target may feature similar alternations.\n\nCommon systems of gender division include:\n\nOther types of division or subdivision may be found in particular languages. These may sometimes be referred to as \"classes\" rather than genders; for some examples, see Noun class. In some of the Slavic languages, for example, within the masculine and sometimes feminine and neuter genders, there is a further division between animate and inanimate nouns – and in Polish, also sometimes between nouns denoting humans and non-humans. (For details, see below.) A human–non-human (or \"rational–non-rational\") distinction is also found in Dravidian languages.\n\nThe grammatical gender of a noun manifests itself in two principal ways: in the modifications that the noun itself undergoes, and in modifications of other related words (agreement). These are described in the following sections.\n\nThe gender of a noun may affect the modifications that the noun itself undergoes, particularly the way in which the noun inflects for number and case. For example, a language like Latin, German or Russian has a number of different declension patterns, and which pattern a particular noun follows may be highly correlated with its gender. For some instances of this, see Latin declension. A concrete example is provided by the German word \"See\", which has two possible genders: when it is masculine (meaning \"lake\") its genitive singular form is \"Sees\", but when it is feminine (meaning \"sea\"), the genitive is \"See\", because feminine nouns do not take the genitive \"-s\".\n\nGender is sometimes reflected in other ways. In Welsh, gender marking is mostly lost on nouns; however, Welsh has initial mutation, where the first consonant of a word changes into another in certain conditions. Gender is one of the factors that can cause one form of mutation (soft mutation). For instance, the word \"merch\" \"girl\" changes into \"ferch\" after the definite article. This only occurs with feminine singular nouns: \"mab\" \"son\" remains unchanged. Adjectives are affected by gender in a similar way.\n\nAdditionally, in many languages, gender is often closely correlated with the basic unmodified form (lemma) of the noun, and sometimes a noun can be modified to produce (for example) masculine and feminine words of similar meaning. See , below.\n\nAgreement, or concord, is a grammatical process in which certain words change their form so that values of certain grammatical categories match those of related words. Gender is one of the categories which frequently require agreement. In this case, nouns may be considered the \"triggers\" of the process, because they have an inherent gender, whereas related words that change their form to match the gender of the noun can be considered the \"target\" of these changes.\n\nThese related words can be, depending on the language: determiners, pronouns, numerals, quantifiers, possessives, adjectives, past and passive participles, verbs, adverbs, complementizers, and adpositions. Gender class may be marked on the noun itself, but can also be marked on other constituents in a noun phrase or sentence. If the noun is explicitly marked, both trigger and target may feature similar alternations.\n\nAs an example, we consider Spanish, a language with two noun genders: masculine and feminine. Among other lexical items, the definite article changes its form according to the gender of the noun. In the singular, the article is: \"el\" (masculine), and \"la\" (feminine). Thus, nouns referring to male beings carry the masculine article, and female beings the feminine article (agreement).\nHowever, every noun must belong to one of the two categories—even nouns referring to sexless entities must be either masculine or feminine. Generally, a word that ends in \"-a\" is feminine and in \"-o\" masculine. However, not all words end in \"a\" or \"o\".\nIn the Spanish sentences \"Él es un buen actor\" \"\"He\" is a good actor\" and \"Ella es una buena actriz\" \"\"She\" is a good actress\", almost every word undergoes gender-related changes. The noun \"actor\" changes by replacing the masculine suffix \"-or\" with the feminine suffix \"-riz\", the personal pronoun \"él\" \"he\" changes to \"ella\" \"she\", and the feminine suffix \"-a\" is added to the article (\"un\" → \"una\") and to the adjective (\"buen\" → \"buena\").\n\nWhen a verb is used as a noun, it is almost always masculine.\nOn the other hand, the result of executing a verb is almost always feminine.\nThe following (highly contrived) Old English sentence provides similar examples of gender agreement.\n\nThe word \"hire\" \"her\" refers to \"lind\" \"shield\". Because this noun was grammatically feminine, the adjectives \"brade\" \"broad\" and \"tilu\" \"good\", as well as the pronouns \"seo\" \"the/that\" and \"hire\" \"her\", which referred to \"lind\", must also appear in their feminine forms. Old English had three genders, masculine, feminine and neuter, but gender inflections (like many other types of inflection in English) were later greatly simplified by sound changes, and then completely lost.\n\nIn modern English, by contrast, the noun \"shield\" takes the neuter pronoun \"it\", because it designates a sexless object. In a sense, the neuter gender has grown to encompass most nouns, including many that were masculine or feminine in Old English. If one were to replace the phrase \"broad shield\" above with \"brave man\" or \"brave woman\", the only change to the rest of the sentence would be in the pronoun at the end, which would become \"him\" or \"her\" respectively.\n\nThere are three main ways by which natural languages categorize nouns into genders: according to logical or symbolic similarities in their meaning (semantic), by grouping them with other nouns that have similar form (morphological), and through apparently arbitrary convention (lexical, possibly rooted in the language's history). In most languages that have grammatical gender, a combination of these three types of criteria is found, although one type may be more prevalent.\n\nIn some languages, the gender of a noun is directly determined by its physical attributes (sex, animacy, etc.), and there are few or no exceptions to this rule. There are relatively few such languages. The Dravidian languages use this system as described below.\n\nAnother example is the Dizi language, which has two asymmetrical genders. The feminine includes all living beings of female sex (e.g. woman, girl, cow...), and diminutives; the masculine encompasses all other nouns (e.g. man, boy, pot, broom...). In this language, feminine nouns are always marked with \"-e\" or \"-in\".\n\nAnother African language, Defaka, has three genders: one for all male humans, one for all female humans, and a third for all the remaining nouns. Gender is only marked in personal pronouns. Standard English pronouns (see below) are very similar in this respect, although the English gendered pronouns (\"he\", \"she\") are used for domestic animals if the sex of the animal is known, and sometimes for certain objects such as ships, e.g. \"What happened to the Titanic? She (or it) sank.\"\n\nIn some other languages, the gender of nouns can again mostly be determined by physical (semantic) attributes, although there remain some nouns whose gender is not assigned in this way (Corbett calls this \"semantic residue\"). The world view (e.g. mythology) of the speakers may influence the division of categories.\n\nAn example is the Zande language, which has four genders: male human, female human, animal, and inanimate. However, there are about 80 nouns representing inanimate entities which are nonetheless animate in gender: heavenly objects (moon, rainbow), metal objects (hammer, ring), edible plants (sweet potato, pea), and non-metallic objects (whistle, ball). Many have a round shape or can be explained by the role they play in mythology.\n\nThe Ket language has three genders (masculine, feminine, and neuter), and most gender assignment is based on semantics, but there are many inanimate nouns outside the neuter class. Masculine nouns include male animates, most fish, trees, the moon, large wooden objects, most living beings and some religious items. Feminine nouns include female animates, three types of fish, some plants, the sun and other heavenly objects, some body parts and skin diseases, the soul, and some religious items. Words for part of a whole, as well as most other nouns that do not fall into any of the aforementioned classes, are neuter. The gender assignment of non-sex-differentiable things is complex. In general, those of no importance to the Kets are feminine, whereas objects of importance (e.g. fish, wood) are masculine. Mythology is again a significant factor.\n\nThe Alamblak language has two genders, masculine and feminine. However, the masculine also includes things which are tall or long and slender, or narrow (e.g. fish, snakes, arrows and slender trees), whereas the feminine gender has things which are short, squat or wide (e.g. turtles, houses, shields and squat trees).\n\nThe distinction between the gender of a noun and the gender of the object it refers to is clear when nouns of different genders can be used for the same object, e.g. French vélo (m.) = bicyclette (f.).\n\nIn many other languages, nouns are assigned to gender largely without any semantic basis – that is, not based on any feature (such as animacy or sex) of the person or thing that a noun represents. However, in many languages there may be a correlation, to a greater or lesser degree, between gender and the form of a noun (such as the letter or syllable with which it ends).\n\nFor example, in Portuguese and Spanish, nouns that end in \"-o\" or a consonant are mostly masculine, whereas those that end in \"-a\" are mostly feminine, regardless of their meaning. (Nouns that end in some other vowel are assigned a gender either according to etymology, by analogy, or by some other convention.) These rules may override semantics in some cases: for example, the noun \"membro\"/\"miembro\" (\"member\") is always masculine, even when it refers to a girl or a woman, and \"pessoa\"/\"persona\" (\"person\") is always feminine, even when it refers to a boy or a man. (In other cases, though, meaning takes precedence: the noun \"comunista\" \"communist\" is masculine when it refers or could refer to a man, even though it ends with \"-a\".) In fact, nouns in Spanish and Portuguese (as in the other Romance languages such as Italian and French) generally follow the gender of the Latin words from which they are derived. When nouns deviate from the rules for gender, there is usually an etymological explanation: \"problema\" (\"problem\") is masculine in Spanish because it was derived from a Greek noun of the neuter gender, whereas \"radio\" (\"radio station\") is feminine, because it is a shortening of \"estación de radio\", a phrase whose head is the feminine noun \"estación\". (Most Spanish nouns in \"-ión\" are feminine; they derive from Latin feminines in \"-o\".)\n\nSuffixes often carry a specific gender. For example, in German, diminutives with the suffixes \"-chen\" and \"-lein\" (meaning \"little, young\") are always neuter, even if they refer to people, as with \"Mädchen\" (\"girl\") and \"Fräulein\" (\"young woman\") (see below). Similarly, the suffix \"-ling\", which makes countable nouns from uncountable nouns (\"Teig\" \"dough\" → \"Teigling\" \"piece of dough\"), or personal nouns from abstract nouns (\"Lehre\" \"teaching\", \"Strafe\" \"punishment\" → \"Lehrling\" \"apprentice\", \"Sträfling\" \"convict\") or adjectives (\"feige\" \"cowardly\" → \"Feigling\" \"coward\"), always produces masculine nouns. And the German suffixes \"-heit\" and \"-keit\" (comparable with \"-hood\" and \"-ness\" in English) produce feminine nouns.\n\nIn Irish, nouns ending in \"-óir/-eoir\" and \"-ín\" are always masculine, whereas those ending \"-óg/-eog\" or \"-lann\" are always feminine.\n\nIn Arabic, nouns whose singular form ends in a \"tāʾ marbūṭa\" (traditionally a , becoming in pausa) are of feminine gender, the only significant exceptions being the word ' (\"caliph\") and certain masculine personal names (e.g. ʾUsāmah). However, many masculine nouns take a \"tāʾ marbūṭa\" in their plural; for example ' (\"male professor\") has the plural ', which might be confused for a feminine singular noun. Gender may also be predictable from the type of derivation: for instance, the verbal nouns of Stem II (e.g. ', from \"\") are always masculine.\n\nIn French, nouns ending in \"-e\" tend to be feminine, whereas others tend to be masculine, but there are many exceptions to this. Certain suffixes are quite reliable indicators, such as \"-age\", which when added to a verb (e.g. \"garer\" \"to park\" -> \"garage\"; nettoyer \"to clean\" -> \"nettoyage\" \"cleaning\") indicates a masculine noun; however, when -\"age\" is part of the root of the word, it can be feminine, as in \"plage\" (\"beach\") or \"image\". On the other hand, nouns ending in \"-tion\", \"-sion\" and \"-aison\" are all feminine.\n\nNouns can sometimes vary their form to enable the derivation of differently gendered cognate nouns; for example, to produce nouns with a similar meaning but referring to someone of a different sex. Thus, in Spanish, \"niño\" means \"boy\", and \"niña\" means \"girl\". This paradigm can be exploited for making new words: from the masculine nouns \"abogado\" \"lawyer\", \"diputado\" \"member of parliament\" and \"doctor\" \"doctor\", it was straightforward to make the feminine equivalents \"abogada\", \"diputada\", and \"doctora\".\n\nIn the same way, personal names are frequently constructed with affixes that identify the sex of the bearer. Common feminine suffixes used in English names are \"-a\", of Latin or Romance origin (cf. \"Robert\" and \"Roberta\"); and \"-e\", of French origin (cf. \"Justin\" and \"Justine\").\n\nAlthough gender inflection may be used to construct nouns and names for people of opposite sexes in languages that have grammatical gender, this alone does not constitute grammatical gender. Distinct words and names for men and women are also common in languages which do not have a grammatical gender system for nouns in general. English, for example, has feminine suffixes such as \"-ess\" (as in \"actress\", \"poetess\", etc.), and also distinguishes male and female personal names, as in the above examples.\n\nIn some languages, any gender markers have been so eroded over time (possibly through deflexion) that they are no longer recognizable. Many German nouns, for example, do not indicate their gender through either meaning or form. In such cases a noun's gender must simply be memorized, and gender can be regarded as an integral part of each noun when considered as an entry in the speaker's lexicon. (This is reflected in dictionaries, which typically indicate the gender of noun headwords where applicable.)\n\nSecond-language learners are often encouraged to memorize a modifier, usually a definite article, in conjunction with each noun – for example, a learner of French may learn the word for \"chair\" as \"la chaise\" (meaning \"the chair\"); this carries the information that the noun is \"chaise\", and that it is feminine (because \"la\" is the feminine singular form of the definite article).\n\nIt is relatively uncommon for a noun to have more than one possible gender. When this happens, it may be associated with a difference in the sex of the referent (as with nouns such as \"comunista\" in Spanish, which may be either masculine or feminine, depending on whether it refers to a male or a female), or with some other difference in the meaning of the word. For example, the German word \"See\" meaning \"lake\" is masculine, whereas the identical word meaning \"sea\" is feminine. In this sense it is used to disambiguate homonyms, especially when the different meanings are totally unrelated. For example, the Bulgarian word \"пръст\" (\"prəst\") means \"finger\" when masculine and \"soil\" when feminine. In even rarer cases the gender may be ambiguous, e.g. in Bulgarian the word \"пу̀стош\", (\"pustosh\", \"wilderness\") may be either masculine (definite form \"пу̀стоша\", \"pustoshə\") or feminine (definite form \"пустошта̀\", \"pustoshta\") without any change in meaning and no preference in usage.\n\nSometimes a noun's gender can change between plural and singular, as with the French words \"amour\" (\"love\"), \"délice\" (\"delight\") and \"orgue\" (\"organ\" as musical instrument), all of which are masculine in the singular but feminine in the plural. These anomalies may have a historical explanation (\"amour\" used to be feminine in the singular too) or result from slightly different notions (\"orgue\" in the singular is usually a barrel organ, whereas the plural \"orgues\" usually refers to the collection of columns in a church organ). Further examples are the Italian words \"uovo\" (\"egg\") and \"braccio\" (\"arm\"). These are masculine in the singular, but form the irregular plurals \"uova\" and \"braccia\", which have the endings of the feminine singular, but have feminine plural agreement. (This is related to the forms of the second declension Latin neuter nouns from which they derive: \"ovum\" and \"bracchium\", with nominative plurals \"ova\" and \"bracchia\".)\n\nIn Norwegian, many nouns could be either feminine or masculine according to the dialect, level of formality or whim of the speaker/writer. Even the two written forms of the language have many nouns whose gender is optional. Choosing the masculine gender will often seem more formal than using the feminine. This might be because before the creation of Norwegian Nynorsk and Norwegian Bokmål in the late 19th century, Norwegians wrote Danish, which has lost the feminine gender, thus making use of the masculine gender (corresponing exactly to Danish common gender in conjugation in Norwegian Bokmål) more old-fashioned and formal sounding to modern Norwegians. Let's take \"sun\" as an example noun. You might conjugate it masculine: \"En sol, solen, soler, solene\" or feminine \"Ei sol, sola, soler, solene\" in Norwegian Bokmål. The same goes for a lot of common words like \"bok\" (book), \"dukke\" (doll), \"bøtte\" (bucket) and so forth. Interestingly, many of the words where it is possible to choose gender are inanimate objects that one might suspect would be conjugated with the neuter gender, but for those nouns where a choice is possible, it is always between masculine and feminine. On the other hand, nouns conjugated with the neuter gender could never be conjugated as feminine or masculine in Norwegian. There is also a slight tendency towards using the masculine indefinite article even when choosing the feminine conjugation of a noun in many eastern Norwegian dialects. For instance, girl: \"En jente - jenta - jenter - jentene\".\n\nIn some languages the gender is distinguished only in singular number but not in plural. In terms of linguistic markedness, these languages neutralize the gender opposition in the plural, itself a marked category. So adjectives and pronouns have three forms in singular (e.g. Bulgarian \"червен\", \"червена\", \"червено\" or German \"roter\", \"rote\", \"rotes\") but only one in plural (Bulgarian \"червени\", German \"rote\") [all examples mean \"red\"]. As a consequence Pluralia tantum nouns (lacking a singular form) cannot be assigned a gender. Example with Bulgarian: \"клещи\" (\"kleshti\", \"pincers\"), \"гащи\" (\"gashti\", \"pants\"), \"очила\" (\"ochila\", \"spectacles\"), \"хриле\" (\"hrile\", \"gills\"). The characteristic ending \"-а\" of \"очила suggests a neuter noun, but there is no way to cross-check it and there are indeed a few masculine nouns using the same ending in their plural (\"крака and \"рога are plurals of masculine \"крак\" \"leg\" and \"рог\" \"horn\"). However, the endings \"-и\" and \"-е\" do not make any such indications because they are ambiguous themselves: although \"-и\" is the regular ending for masculine and feminine nouns, both are in fact used to form plurals of nouns of all three genders (e.g. \"заводи, \"жени, \"насекоми from masculine \"завод\" \"factory\", feminine \"жена\" \"woman\" and neuter \"насекомо\" \"insect\" or \"крале, \"ръце, \"колене\" from masculine \"крал\" \"king\", feminine \"ръка\" \"hand\" and neuter \"коляно\" \"knee\").\n\nOther languages, e.g. Serbo-Croatian, allow doubly marked forms both for number and gender. In these languages, each noun has a definite gender no matter the number.\n\nIn some languages, some names have two forms, a male and a female one. This can be true of occupations and nationalities. For example, Andrew and Andrea in English, or Κωνσταντίνος and Κωνσταντίνα in Greek. Or actor and actress in English, but doctor for both, and ηθοποιός (actor) for both male and female in Greek and γιατρός (doctor) again for both, but with informal female variants γιατρίνα and γιάτραινα too. Finally, in the case of a nationality, in Greek there are five forms: male and female for people (and sometimes for other living beings), and masculine, feminine, and neuter for nouns. For example, English = Άγγλος, Αγγλίδα, αγγλικός, αγγλική, αγγλικό. To complicate matters, the Greek language often offers additional less formal versions of these. The corresponding for English are the following: Εγγλέζος, Εγγλέζα, εγγλέζικος, εγγλέζικη, εγγλέζικο. The formal forms come from the name Αγγλία (England), while the less formal are variants of the formal.\n\nA noun may belong to a given class because of characteristic features of its referent, such as sex, animacy, shape, although in some instances a noun can be placed in a particular class based purely on its grammatical behavior. Some authors use the term \"grammatical gender\" as a synonym of \"noun class\", but others use different definitions for each.\n\nMany authors prefer \"noun classes\" when none of the inflections in a language relate to sex, such as when an animate–inanimate distinction is made. Note however that the word \"gender\" derives from Latin \"genus\" (also the root of \"genre\") which originally meant \"kind\", so it does not necessarily have a sexual meaning.\n\nA classifier, or measure word, is a word or morpheme used in some languages together with a noun, principally to enable numbers and certain other determiners to be applied to the noun. They are not regularly used in English or other European languages, although they parallel the use of words such as \"piece(s)\" and \"head\" in phrases like \"three pieces of paper\" or \"thirty head of cattle\". They are a prominent feature of East Asian languages, where it is common for all nouns to require a classifier when being quantified – for example, the equivalent of \"three people\" is often \"three \"classifier\" people\". A more general type of classifier (classifier handshapes) can be found in sign languages.\n\nClassifiers can be considered similar to genders or noun classes, in that a language which uses classifiers normally has a number of different ones, used with different sets of nouns. These sets depend largely on properties of the things that the nouns denote (for example, a particular classifier may be used for long thin objects, another for flat objects, another for people, another for abstracts, etc.), although sometimes a noun is associated with a particular classifier more by convention than for any obvious reason. However it is also possible for a given noun to be usable with any of several classifiers; for example, the Mandarin Chinese classifier 个 \"gè\" is frequently used as an alternative to various more specific classifiers.\n\nAs noted above, pronouns may agree in gender with the noun or noun phrase to which they refer (their antecedent). Sometimes, however, there is no antecedent – the referent of the pronoun is deduced indirectly from the context. In such cases, the pronoun is likely to agree with the \"natural gender\" of the referent. Examples of this can be in most European languages, including English (the personal pronouns \"he\", \"she\" and \"it\" are used depending on whether the referent is male, female, or inanimate or non-human; this is in spite of the fact that English does not generally have grammatical gender). A parallel example is provided by the object suffixes of verbs in Arabic, which correspond to object pronouns, and which also inflect for gender in the second person (though not in the first):\n\nNot all languages have gendered pronouns. In languages that never had grammatical gender, there is normally just one word for \"he\" and \"she\", like \"dia\" in Indonesian, \"ő\" in Hungarian and \"o\" in Turkish. These languages might only have different pronouns and inflections in the third person to differentiate between people and inanimate objects, but even this distinction is often absent. (In written Finnish, for example, \"hän\" is used for \"he\" and \"she\" and \"se\" for \"it\", but in the colloquial language \"se\" is usually used for \"he\" and \"she\" as well.)\n\nFor more on these different types of pronoun, see Gender-specific pronoun and Gender-neutral pronoun. Issues may arise in languages with gender-specific pronouns in cases when the gender of the referent is unknown or not specified; this is discussed under Gender-neutral language, and in relation to English at Singular \"they\".\n\nIn some cases the gender of a pronoun is not marked in the form of the pronoun itself, but is marked on other words by way of agreement. Thus the French word for \"I\" is \"je\", regardless of who is speaking; but this word becomes feminine or masculine depending on the sex of the speaker, as may be reflected through adjective agreement: \"je suis forte\" (\"I am strong\", spoken by a female); \"je suis fort\" (the same spoken by a male).\n\nIn null-subject languages (and in some elliptical expressions in other languages), such agreement may take place even though the pronoun does not in fact appear. For example, in Portuguese:\nThe two sentences above mean literally \"much obliged\"; the adjective agrees with the natural gender of the speaker, that is, with the gender of the first person pronoun which does not appear explicitly here.\n\nA dummy pronoun is a type of pronoun used when a particular verb argument (such as the subject) is nonexistent, but when a reference to the argument is nevertheless syntactically required. They occur mostly in non-pro-drop languages, such as English (because in pro-drop languages the position of the argument can be left empty). Examples in English are the uses of \"it\" in \"It's raining\" and \"It's nice to relax.\"\n\nWhen a language has gendered pronouns, the use of a particular word as a dummy pronoun may involve the selection of a particular gender, even though there is no noun to agree with. In languages with a neuter gender, a neuter pronoun is usually used, as in German \"es regnet\" (\"it rains, it's raining\"), where \"es\" is the neuter third person singular pronoun. (English behaves similarly, because the word \"it\" comes from the Old English neuter gender.) In languages with only masculine and feminine genders, the dummy pronoun may be the masculine third person singular, as in the French for \"it's raining\": \"il pleut\" (where \"il\" means \"he\", or \"it\" when referring to masculine nouns); although some languages use the feminine, as in the equivalent Welsh sentence: \"mae hi'n bwrw glaw\" (where the dummy pronoun is \"hi\", which means \"she\", or \"it\" when referring to feminine nouns).\n\nA similar, apparently arbitrary gender assignment may need to be made in the case of indefinite pronouns, where the referent is generally unknown. In this case the question is usually not which pronoun to use, but which gender to assign a given pronoun to (for such purposes as adjective agreement). For example, the French pronouns \"quelqu'un\" (\"someone\"), \"personne\" (\"no-one\") and \"quelque chose\" (\"something\") are all treated as masculine – this is in spite of the fact that the last two correspond to feminine nouns (\"personne\" meaning \"person\", and \"chose\" meaning \"thing\").\n\nFor other situations in which such a \"default\" gender assignment may be required, see below.\n\nThe \"natural gender\" of a noun, pronoun or noun phrase is a gender to which it would be expected to belong based on relevant attributes of its referent. This usually means masculine or feminine, depending on the referent's sex (or gender in the sociological sense). For example, in Spanish, \"mujer\" (\"woman\") is feminine whereas \"hombre\" (\"man\") is masculine; these attributions occur solely due to the semantically inherent gender character of each noun.\n\nThe \"grammatical gender\" of a noun does not always coincide with its natural gender. An example of this is the German word \"Mädchen\" (\"girl\"); this is derived from \"Magd\" \"maidservant\" with the diminutive suffix \"-chen\", and this suffix always makes the noun grammatically neuter. Hence the grammatical gender of \"Mädchen\" is neuter, although its natural gender is feminine (because it refers to a female person).\n\nOther examples include:\n\nNormally, such exceptions are a small minority. However, in some local dialects of German, nouns and proper names for female persons have shifted to the neuter gender (presumably further influenced by the standard word \"Weib\"), but the feminine gender remains for words denoting objects.\n\nWhen a noun with conflicting natural and grammatical gender is the antecedent of a pronoun, it may not be clear which gender of pronoun to choose. There is a certain tendency to keep the grammatical gender when a close back-reference is made, but to switch to natural gender when the reference is further away. For example, in German, the sentences \"The girl has come home from school. She is now doing her homework\" can be translated in two ways:\nThough the second sentence may appear grammatically incorrect (constructio ad sensum), it is common in speech. With one or more intervening sentences, the second form becomes even more likely. However, a switch to the natural gender is never possible with articles and \"attributive\" pronouns or adjectives. Thus it can never be correct to say \"*eine Mädchen\" (\"a girl\" – with female indefinite article) or \"*diese kleine Mädchen\" (\"this little girl\" – with female demonstrative pronoun and adjective).\n\nThis phenomenon is quite popular in Slavic languages: for example Polish \"kreatura\" (deprecative \"creature\") is feminine but can be used to refer both man (masculine gender), woman (feminine gender), child (neuter gender) or even animate nouns (e.g. a dog being masculine). Similarly with other deprecatory nouns as \"pierdoła\", \"ciapa\", \"łamaga\", \"łajza\", \"niezdara\" (\"wuss, klutz\"); \"niemowa\" (\"mute\") can used deprecatively as described previously, and then can be used for verbs marked for the male and female genders.\n\nIn the case of languages which have masculine and feminine genders, the relation between biological sex and grammatical gender tends to be less exact in the case of animals than in the case of people. In Spanish, for instance, a cheetah is always \"un guepardo\" (masculine) and a zebra is always \"una cebra\" (feminine), regardless of their biological sex. To specify the sex of an animal, an adjective may be added, as in \"un guepardo hembra\" (\"a female cheetah\"), or \"una cebra macho\" (\"a male zebra\"). Different names for the male and the female of a species are more frequent for common pets or farm animals, e.g. English \"cow\" and \"bull\", Spanish \"vaca\" \"cow\" and \"toro\" \"bull\".\n\nAs regards the pronouns used to refer to animals, these generally agree in gender with the nouns denoting those animals, rather than the animals' sex (natural gender). In a language like English, which does not assign grammatical gender to nouns, the pronoun used for referring to objects (\"it\") is often used for animals also. However, if the sex of the animal is known, and particularly in the case of companion animals, the gendered pronouns (\"he\" and \"she\") may be used as they would be for a human.\n\nIn Polish, a few general words such as \"zwierzę\" (\"animal\") or \"bydlę\" (\"animal, one head of cattle\") are neuter, but most species names are masculine or feminine. When the sex of an animal is known, it will normally be referred to using gendered pronouns consistent with its sex; otherwise the pronouns will correspond to the gender of the noun denoting its species.\n\nThere are certain situations where the assignment of gender to a noun, pronoun or noun phrase may not be straightforward. This includes in particular:\n\nIn languages with masculine and feminine gender, the masculine is usually employed by default to refer to persons of unknown gender, and to groups of people of mixed gender. Thus, in French the feminine plural pronoun \"elles\" always designates an all-female group of people (or stands for a group of nouns all of feminine gender), but the masculine equivalent \"ils\" may refer to a group of males or masculine nouns, to a mixed group, or to a group of people of unknown genders. In such cases, one says that the feminine gender is semantically marked, whereas the masculine gender is unmarked.\n\nIn English, the problem of gender determination does not arise in the plural, because gender in that language is reflected only in pronouns, and the plural pronoun \"they\" does not have gendered forms. In the singular, however, the issue frequently arises when a person of unspecified or unknown gender is being referred to. In this case it has been traditional to use the masculine (\"he\"), but other solutions are now often preferred – see Gender-neutral language and Singular \"they\".\n\nIn languages with a neuter gender, such as Slavic and Germanic languages, the neuter is often used for indeterminate gender reference, particularly when the things referred to are not people. In some cases this may even apply when referring to people, particularly children. For example, in English, one may use \"it\" to refer to a child, particularly when speaking generically rather than about a particular child of known sex.\n\nIn Icelandic (which preserves a masculine–feminine–neuter distinction in both singular and plural), the neuter is used for indeterminate or mixed gender reference even when talking about people. For example, the greeting \"velkominn\" (\"welcome\") is altered depending on who is being spoken to:\nNevertheless, even in Icelandic, the feminine is considered somewhat more marked than the masculine.\n\nIn Swedish (which has an overall common–neuter gender system), masculinity may be argued to be a marked feature, because in the weak adjectival declension there is a distinct ending (\"-e\") for naturally masculine nouns (as in \"min lillebror\", \"my little brother\"). In spite of this, the third-person singular masculine pronoun \"han\" would normally be the default for a person of unknown gender, although in practice the indefinite pronoun \"man\" and the reflexive \"sig\" or its possessive forms \"sin/sitt/sina\" usually make this unnecessary.\n\nIn Polish, where a gender-like distinction is made in the plural between \"masculine personal\" and all other cases (see below), a group is treated as masculine personal if it contains at least one male person.\n\nIn languages which preserve a three-way gender division in the plural, the rules for determining the gender (and sometimes number) of a coordinated noun phrase (\"... and ...\") may be quite complex. Czech is an example of such a language, with a division (in the plural) between masculine animate, masculine inanimate, feminine, and neuter. The rules for gender and number of coordinated phrases in that language are summarized at .\n\nNouns which have the same meanings in different languages need not have the same gender. This is particularly so in the case of things with no natural gender, such as sexless objects. There is nothing objective about a table, for example, which would cause it to be associated with any particular gender, and different languages' words for \"table\" are found to have various genders: feminine, as with the French \"table\"; masculine, as with German \"Tisch\"; or neuter, as with Norwegian \"bord\". (Even within a given language, nouns that denote the same concept may differ in gender – for example, of two German words for \"car\", \"Wagen\" is masculine whereas \"Auto\" is neuter.)\n\nCognate nouns in closely related languages are likely to have the same gender, because they tend to inherit the gender of the original word in the parent language. For instance, in the Romance languages, the words for \"sun\" are masculine, being derived from the Latin masculine noun \"sol\", whereas the words for \"moon\" are feminine, being derived from the Latin feminine \"luna\". (This contrasts with the genders found in German, where \"Sonne\" \"sun\" is feminine, and \"Mond\" \"moon\" is masculine.) However, there are exceptions to this principle. For instance, \"arte\" (\"art\") is feminine in Italian, like the Latin word \"ars\" from which it stems, but in French, the corresponding word \"art\" is masculine. Likewise, the word for \"boat\" is neuter in German (\"das Boot\"), but common gender in Swedish (\"en båt\").\n\nSome more examples of the above phenomena are given below. (These come mostly from the Slavic languages, where gender largely correlates with the noun ending.)\n\nIbrahim identifies several processes by which a language assigns a gender to a newly borrowed word; these processes follow patterns by which even children, through their subconscious recognition of patterns, can often correctly predict a noun's gender.\n\nSometimes the gender of a word switches with time. For example, the Russian modern loanword \"виски\" (\"viski\") \"whisky\" was originally feminine, then masculine, and today it has become neuter.\n\nIbrahim identified three possible useful roles of grammatical gender:\n\nAmong these, role 2 is probably the most important in everyday usage. Languages with gender distinction generally have fewer cases of ambiguity concerning, for example, pronominal reference. In the English phrase \"\"a flowerbed in the garden which I maintain\"\" only context tells us whether the relative clause (\"which I maintain\") refers to the whole garden or just the flowerbed. In German, gender distinction prevents such ambiguity. The word for \"(flower) bed\" (\"Beet\") is neuter, whereas that for \"garden\" (\"Garten\") is masculine. Hence, if a neuter relative pronoun is used, the relative clause refers to \"bed\", and if a masculine pronoun is used, the relative clause refers to \"garden\". Because of this, languages with gender distinction can often use pronouns where in English a noun would have to be repeated in order to avoid confusion. It does not, however, help in cases where the words are of the same grammatical gender. (There are often several synonymous nouns of different grammatical gender to pick from to avoid this, however.)\n\nMoreover, grammatical gender may serve to distinguish homophones. It is a quite common phenomenon in language development for two phonemes to merge, thereby making etymologically distinct words sound alike. In languages with gender distinction, however, these word pairs may still be distinguishable by their gender. For example, French \"pot\" (\"pot\") and \"peau\" (\"skin\") are homophones /po/, but disagree in gender: \"le pot\" vs. \"la peau\".\n\nAccording to research by Lera Boroditsky, grammatical genders are among the aspects of languages that shape how people think (a hypothesis called \"linguistic relativity\"). In one study by Boroditsky, in which native speakers of German and Spanish were asked to describe everyday objects in English, she found that they were more likely to use attributes conventionally associated with the genders of the objects in their native languages.\n\nFor instance, German speakers more often described \" (f.)\" \"bridge\" with words like 'beautiful', 'elegant', 'fragile', 'peaceful', 'pretty', and 'slender', whereas Spanish speakers, which use \"puente (m.)\" used terms like 'big', 'dangerous', 'long', 'strong', 'sturdy', and 'towering'.\n\nAlso according to Boroditsky, the gender in which concepts are anthropomorphized in art is dependent, in 85% of all cases, on the grammatical gender of the concept in the artist's language. Therefore, in German art \"Tod (m.)\" \"death\" is generally portrayed as a man, but in Russian art \"смерть (f.)\" \"death\" is generally portrayed as a woman.\n\nA problem with such arguments is that, as argued by Adèle Mercier, in French and many other languages the same class of objects can be referred to by words of different grammatical gender.\n\nGrammatical gender is a common phenomenon in the world's languages. A typological survey of 174 languages revealed that over one fourth of them had grammatical gender. Gender systems rarely overlap with numerical classifier systems. Gender and noun class systems are usually found in fusional or agglutinating languages, whereas classifiers are more typical of isolating languages. Thus, these are main characteristics of gendered languages:\n\nMany Indo-European languages, but not English, provide archetypical examples of grammatical gender.\n\nResearch indicates that the earliest stages of Proto-Indo-European had two genders (animate and inanimate), as did Hittite, the earliest attested Indo-European language. According to the theory, the animate gender, which (unlike the inanimate) had an independent accusative form, later split into masculine and feminine, thus originating the three-way classification into masculine, feminine and neuter.\n\nMany Indo-European languages retained the three genders, including most Slavic languages, Latin, Sanskrit, Ancient and Modern Greek, and German. In them, there is a high but not absolute correlation between grammatical gender and declensional class. Many linguists believe that to be true of the middle and late stages of Proto-Indo-European.\n\nHowever, many languages reduced the number of genders to two. Some lost the neuter, leaving masculine and feminine like most Romance languages (see ; a few traces of the neuter remain, such as the distinct Spanish pronoun \"ello\") and Hindustani and the Celtic languages. Others merged feminine and the masculine into a common gender but retained the neuter, as in Swedish and Danish (and, to some extent, Dutch; see Gender in Dutch grammar). Finally, some languages, such as English and Afrikaans, have nearly completely lost grammatical gender (retaining only some traces, such as the English pronouns \"he\", \"she\" and \"it\"), and Bengali, Persian, Armenian, Assamese, Odia, Khowar, and Kalasha have lost it entirely.\n\nOn the other hand, some Slavic languages can be argued to have added new genders to the classical three (see below).\n\nAlthough grammatical gender was a fully productive inflectional category in Old English, Modern English has a much less pervasive gender system, primarily based on natural gender and reflected essentially in pronouns only.\n\nThere are a few traces of gender marking in Modern English:\n\nHowever, these are relatively insignificant features compared with a typical language with full grammatical gender. English nouns are not generally considered to belong to gender classes in the way that French, German or Russian nouns are. There is no gender agreement in English between nouns and their modifiers (articles, other determiners, or adjectives, with the occasional exception such as \"blond/blonde\", a spelling convention borrowed from French). Gender agreement applies in effect only to pronouns, and the choice of pronoun is determined based on semantics (perceived qualities of the thing being referred to) rather than on any conventional assignment of particular nouns to particular genders.\n\nIt should also be noted that only a relatively small number of English nouns have distinct male and female forms; many of them are loanwords from non-Germanic languages (the suffixes \"-ress\" and \"-rix\" in words such as \"actress\" and \"aviatrix\", for instance, derive from Latin \"-rix\", in the first case via the French \"-rice\"). English has no live productive gender markers. An example of such a marker might be the suffix \"-ette\" (of French provenance), but this is seldom used today, surviving mostly in either historical contexts or with disparaging or humorous intent.\n\nThe gender of an English pronoun, then, typically coincides with the sex (natural gender) of its referent, rather than with the grammatical gender of its antecedent. The choice of \"she\", \"he\" and \"it\" comes down to whether the pronoun is intended to designate a female, a male or something else. There are certain exceptions, however:\n\nProblems arise when selecting a personal pronoun to refer to someone of unspecified or unknown gender (see also above). Traditionally, the masculine has been used as the \"default\" gender in English. The use of the plural pronoun \"they\" with singular reference is common in practice. The neuter \"it\" may be used for a baby but not normally for an older child or adult. (Other genderless pronouns exist, such as the impersonal pronoun \"one\", but they are not generally substitutable for a personal pronoun.) For more information see Gender-neutral language and Singular \"they\".\n\nThe Slavic languages mostly continue the Proto-Indo-European system of three genders, masculine, feminine and neuter. Gender correlates largely with noun endings (masculine nouns typically end in a consonant, feminines in \"-a\" and neuters in \"-o\") but there are many exceptions, particularly in the case of nouns whose stems end in a soft consonant. However, some of the languages, including Russian, Czech, Slovak and Polish, also make certain additional grammatical distinctions between animate and inanimate nouns. In the case of Russian and Polish, in the plural, they differentiate between human and non-human nouns.\n\nIn Russian, the different treatment of animate nouns involves their accusative case (and that of adjectives qualifying them) being formed identically to the genitive rather than to the nominative. In the singular that applies to masculine nouns only, but in the plural, it applies in all genders. See Russian declension.\n\nA similar system applies in Czech, but the situation is somewhat different in the plural (only masculine nouns are affected, and the distinctive feature is a distinct inflective ending for masculine animate nouns in the nominative plural and for adjectives and verbs agreeing with those nouns). See Czech declension.\n\nPolish might be said to distinguish five genders: personal masculine (referring to male humans), animate non-personal masculine, inanimate masculine, feminine, and neuter. The animate–inanimate opposition for the masculine gender applies in the singular, and the personal–impersonal opposition, which classes animals along with inanimate objects, applies in the plural. (A few nouns denoting inanimate things are treated grammatically as animate and vice versa.) The manifestations of the differences are as follows:\n\nA few nouns have both personal and impersonal forms, depending on meaning (for example, \"klient\" may behave as an impersonal noun when it refers to a client in the computing sense). For more information on the above inflection patterns, see Polish morphology. For certain rules concerning the treatment of mixed-gender groups, see above.\n\nIn the Dravidian languages, nouns are classified primarily on the basis of their semantic properties. The highest-level classification of nouns is often described as being between \"rational\" and \"nonrational\". Nouns representing humans and deities are considered rational, and other nouns (those representing animals and objects) are treated as nonrational. Within the rational class there are further subdivisions into masculine, feminine and collective nouns. For further information, see Tamil grammar.\n\nMany constructed languages have natural gender systems similar to that of English. Animate nouns can have distinct forms reflecting natural gender, and personal pronouns are selected according to natural gender. There is no gender agreement on modifiers.\n\nSee also Gender-neutrality in languages with grammatical gender: International auxiliary languages and Gender-specific pronoun: Constructed languages.\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "13068", "title": "Grammatical gender"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13070", "text": "LGBT social movements\n\nLesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ) social movements are social movements that advocate for the equalized acceptance of LGBT people in society. In these movements, LGBTQ people and their allies have a long history of campaigning for what is now generally called LGBTQ rights, sometimes also called gay rights or gay and lesbian rights. Although there is not a primary or an overarching central organization that represents all LGBT people and their interests, numerous LGBT rights organizations are active worldwide. The earliest organizations to support LGBT rights were formed in the 19th century.\n\nA commonly stated goal among these movements is social equality for LGBT people. Some have also focused on building LGBT communities or worked towards liberation for the broader society from biphobia, homophobia, and transphobia. LGBT movements organized today are made up of a wide range of political activism and cultural activity, including lobbying, street marches, social groups, media, art, and research.\n\nSociologist Mary Bernstein writes: \"For the lesbian and gay movement, then, cultural goals include (but are not limited to) challenging dominant constructions of masculinity and femininity, homophobia, and the primacy of the gendered heterosexual nuclear family (heteronormativity). Political goals include changing laws and policies in order to gain new rights, benefits, and protections from harm.\" Bernstein emphasizes that activists seek both types of goals in both the civil and political spheres.\n\nAs with other social movements there is also conflict within and between LGBT movements, especially about strategies for change and debates over exactly who comprises the constituency that these movements represent. There is debate over to what extent lesbians, gays, bisexuals, transgender people, intersexed people and others share common interests and a need to work together. Leaders of the lesbian and gay movement of the 1970s, 80s and 90s often attempted to hide masculine lesbians, feminine gay men, transgender people, and bisexuals from the public eye, creating internal divisions within LGBT communities. Roffee and Waling (2016) discovered that LGBTIQ people experience microaggressions, bullying and anti-social behaviours from other people within the LGBTIQ community. This is due to misconceptions and conflicting views as to what entails \"LGBTIQ\". For example, transsexual people found that other members of the community were not understanding to their own, individual, specific needs and would instead make ignorant assumptions. Additionally, bisexual people found that lesbian or gay people were not understanding or appreciative of the bisexual sexuality. Evidently, even though most of these people would say that they stand for the same values as the majority of the community, there are still remaining inconsistencies even within the LGBTIQ community. \n\nLGBT movements have often adopted a kind of identity politics that sees gay, bisexual and transgender people as a fixed class of people; a minority group or groups. Those using this approach aspire to liberal political goals of freedom and equal opportunity, and aim to join the political mainstream on the same level as other groups in society. In arguing that sexual orientation and gender identity are innate and cannot be consciously changed, attempts to change gay, lesbian and bisexual people into heterosexuals (\"conversion therapy\") are generally opposed by the LGBT community. Such attempts are often based in religious beliefs that perceive gay, lesbian and bisexual activity as immoral.\n\nHowever, others within LGBT movements have criticised identity politics as limited and flawed, elements of the queer movement have argued that the categories of gay and lesbian are restrictive, and attempted to deconstruct those categories, which are seen to \"reinforce rather than challenge a cultural system that will always mark the nonheterosexual as inferior.\"\n\nAfter the French Revolution the anticlerical feeling in Catholic countries coupled with the liberalizing effect of the Napoleonic Code made it possible to sweep away sodomy laws. However, in Protestant countries, where the church was less severe, there was no general reaction against statutes that were religious in origin. As a result, many of those countries retained their statutes on sodomy until late in the 20th century.\n\nIn eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Europe, same-sex sexual behaviour and cross-dressing were widely considered to be socially unacceptable, and were serious crimes under sodomy and sumptuary laws. There were, however, some exceptions. For example, in the 17th century cross dressing was common in plays, as evident in the content of many of William Shakespeare's plays and by the actors in actual performance (since female roles in Elizabethan theater were always performed by males, usually prepubescent boys).\n\nThomas Cannon wrote what may be the earliest published defense of homosexuality in English, \"Ancient and Modern Pederasty Investigated and Exemplify'd\" (1749). Although only fragments of his work have survived, it was a humorous anthology of homosexual advocacy, written with an obvious enthusiasm for its subject. It contains the argument: \"Unnatural Desire is a Contradiction in Terms; downright Nonsense. Desire is an amatory Impulse of the inmost human Parts: Are not they, however constructed, and consequently impelling, Nature?\"\nSocial reformer Jeremy Bentham wrote the first known argument for homosexual law reform in England around 1785, at a time when the legal penalty for buggery was death by hanging. His advocacy stemmed from his utilitarian philosophy, in which the morality of an action is determined by the net consequence of that action on human well-being. He argued that homosexuality was a victimless crime, and therefore not deserving of social approbation or criminal charges. He regarded popular negative attitudes against homosexuality as an irrational prejudice, fanned and perpetuated by religious teachings. However, he did not publicize his views as he feared reprisal; his powerful essay was not published until 1978.\n\nThe emerging currents of secular humanist thought which had inspired Bentham also informed the French Revolution, and when the newly formed National Constituent Assembly began drafting the policies and laws of the new republic in 1792, groups of militant \"sodomite-citizens\" in Paris petitioned the Assemblée nationale, the governing body of the French Revolution, for freedom and recognition. In 1791, France became the first nation to decriminalize homosexuality, probably thanks in part to Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérès, who was one of the authors of the Napoleonic Code. With the introduction of the Napoleonic Code in 1808, the Duchy of Warsaw also decriminalized homosexuality.\n\nIn 1830, the new Penal Code of the Brazilian Empire did not repeat the title XIII of the fifth book of the \"Ordenações Philipinas\", which made sodomy a crime.\n\nIn 1833, an anonymous English-language writer wrote a poetic defense of Captain Nicholas Nicholls, who had been sentenced to death in London for sodomy:\n\nThree years later in Switzerland, Heinrich Hoessli published the first volume of \"Eros: Die Männerliebe der Griechen\" (English: \"Eros: The Male Love of the Greeks\"), another defence of same-sex love.\n\nIn many ways, social attitudes to homosexuality became more hostile during the late Victorian era. In 1885 the Labouchere Amendment was included in the Criminal Law Amendment Act, which criminalized 'any act of gross indecency with another male person'; a charge that was successfully invoked to convict playwright Oscar Wilde in 1895 with the most severe sentence possible under the Act.\n\nFrom the 1870s, social reformers began to defend homosexuality, but due to the controversial nature of their advocacy, kept their identities secret. A secret British society called the \"Order of Chaeronea\" campaigned for the legalisation of homosexuality, and counted playwright Oscar Wilde among its members in the last decades of the 19th century. The society was founded by George Cecil Ives, one of the earliest gay rights campaigners, who had been working for the end of oppression of homosexuals, what he called the \"Cause\". Ives met Oscar Wilde at the Authors' Club in London in 1892. Oscar Wilde was taken by his boyish looks and persuaded him to shave off his moustache, and once kissed him passionately in the Travellers' Club. In 1893, Lord Alfred Douglas, with whom he had a brief affair, introduced Ives to several Oxford poets whom Ives also tried to recruit. In 1897, Ives created and founded the first homosexual rights group, the Order of Chaeronea. Members included Charles Kains Jackson, Samuel Elsworth Cottam, Montague Summers, and John Gambril Nicholson.\n\nJohn Addington Symonds was a poet and an early advocate of male love. In 1873, he wrote \"A Problem in Greek Ethics\", a work of what would later be called \"gay history.\" Although the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" credits the medical writer C.G. Chaddock for introducing \"homosexual\" into the English language in 1892, Symonds had already used the word in \"A Problem in Greek Ethics\".\nSymonds also translated classical poetry on homoerotic themes, and wrote poems drawing on ancient Greek imagery and language such as \"Eudiades\", which has been called \"the most famous of his homoerotic poems\". While the taboos of Victorian England prevented Symonds from speaking openly about homosexuality, his works published for a general audience contained strong implications and some of the first direct references to male-male sexual love in English literature. By the end of his life, Symonds' homosexuality had become an open secret in Victorian literary and cultural circles. In particular, Symonds' memoirs, written over a four-year period, from 1889 to 1893, form the earliest known self-conscious homosexual autobiography.\n\nAnother friend of Ives was the English socialist poet Edward Carpenter. Carpenter thought that homosexuality was an innate and natural human characteristic and that it should not be regarded as a sin or a criminal offence. In the 1890s, Carpenter began a concerted effort to campaign against discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation, possibly in response to the recent death of Symonds, whom he viewed as his campaigning inspiration. His 1908 book on the subject, \"The Intermediate Sex\", would become a foundational text of the LGBT movements of the 20th century. Scottish anarchist John Henry Mackay also wrote in defense of same-sex love and androgyny.\n\nEnglish sexologist Havelock Ellis wrote the first objective scientific study of homosexuality in 1897, in which he treated it as a neutral sexual condition. Called \"Sexual Inversion\" it was first printed in German and then translated into English a year later. In the book, Ellis argued that same-sex relationships could not be characterized as a pathology or a crime and that its importance rose above the arbitrary restrictions imposed by society. He also studied what he called 'inter-generational relationships' and that these also broke societal taboos on age difference in sexual relationships. The book was so controversial at the time that one bookseller was charged in court for holding copies of the work. It is claimed that Ellis coined the term 'homosexual', but in fact he disliked the word due to its conflation of Greek and Latin.\n\nThese early proponents of LGBT rights, such as Carpenter, were often aligned with a broader socio-political movement known as 'free love'; a critique of Victorian sexual morality and the traditional institutions of family and marriage that were seen to enslave women. Some advocates of free love in the early 20th century, including Russian anarchist and feminist Emma Goldman, also spoke in defence of same-sex love and challenged repressive legislation.\n\nAn early LGBT movement also began in Germany at the turn of the 20th century, centering on the doctor and writer Magnus Hirschfeld. In 1897 he formed the Scientific-Humanitarian Committee campaign publicly against the notorious law \"Paragraph 175,\" which made sex between men illegal. Adolf Brand later broke away from the group, disagreeing with Hirschfeld's medical view of the \"intermediate sex,\" seeing male-male sex as merely an aspect of manly virility and male social bonding. Brand was the first to use \"outing\" as a political strategy, claiming that German Chancellor Bernhard von Bülow engaged in homosexual activity.\nThe 1901 book \"Sind es Frauen? Roman über das dritte Geschlecht\" (English: \"Are These Women? Novel about the Third Sex\") by Aimée Duc was as much a political treatise as a novel, criticising pathological theories of homosexuality and gender inversion in women. Anna Rüling, delivering a public speech in 1904 at the request of Hirschfeld, became the first female Uranian activist. Rüling, who also saw \"men, women, and homosexuals\" as three distinct genders, called for an alliance between the women's and sexual reform movements, but this speech is her only known contribution to the cause. Women only began to join the previously male-dominated sexual reform movement around 1910 when the German government tried to expand Paragraph 175 to outlaw sex between women. Heterosexual feminist leader Helene Stöcker became a prominent figure in the movement. Friedrich Radszuweit published LGBT literature and magazines in Berlin (e.g., \"Die Freundin\").\n\nHirschfeld, whose life was dedicated to social progress for people who were transsexual, transvestite and homosexual, formed the Institut für Sexualwissenschaft (Institute for Sexology) in 1919. The institute conducted an enormous amount of research, saw thousands of transgender and homosexual clients at consultations, and championed a broad range of sexual reforms including sex education, contraception and women's rights. However, the gains made in Germany would soon be drastically reversed with the rise of Nazism, and the institute and its library were destroyed in 1933. The Swiss journal Der Kreis was the only part of the movement to continue through the Nazi era.\n\nUSSR's Criminal Code of 1922 decriminalised homosexuality. This was a remarkable step in the USSR at the time – which was very backward economically and socially, and where many conservative attitudes towards sexuality prevailed. This step was part of a larger project of freeing sexual relationships and expanding women's rights – including legalising abortion, granting divorce on demand, equal rights for women, and attempts to socialise housework. During Stalin's era, however, USSR reverted all these progressive measures – re-criminalising homosexuality and imprisoning gay men and banning abortion.\n\nIn 1928, English writer Radclyffe Hall published a novel titled \"The Well of Loneliness\". Its plot centers on Stephen Gordon, a woman who identifies herself as an invert after reading Krafft-Ebing's \"Psychopathia Sexualis\", and lives within the homosexual subculture of Paris. The novel included a foreword by Havelock Ellis and was intended to be a call for tolerance for inverts by publicizing their disadvantages and accidents of being born inverted. Hall subscribed to Ellis and Krafft-Ebing's theories and rejected (conservatively understood version of) Freud's theory that same-sex attraction was caused by childhood trauma and was curable.\n\nIn the United States, several secret or semi-secret groups were formed explicitly to advance the rights of homosexuals as early as the turn of the 20th century, but little is known about them. A better documented group is Henry Gerber's Society for Human Rights formed in Chicago in 1924, which was quickly suppressed.\n\nImmediately following World War II, a number of homosexual rights groups came into being or were revived across the Western world, in Britain, France, Germany, the Netherlands, the Scandinavian countries and the United States. These groups usually preferred the term \"homophile\" to \"homosexual\", emphasizing love over sex. The homophile movement began in the late 1940s with groups in the Netherlands and Denmark, and continued throughout the 1950s and 1960s with groups in Sweden, Norway, the United States, France, Britain and elsewhere. ONE, Inc., the first public homosexual organization in the U.S, was bankrolled by the wealthy transsexual man Reed Erickson. A U.S. transgender rights journal, \"Transvestia: The Journal of the American Society for Equality in Dress\", also published two issues in 1952.\n\nThe homophile movement lobbied to establish a prominent influence in political systems of social acceptability. Radicals of the 1970s would later disparage the homophile groups for being assimilationist. Any demonstrations were orderly and polite. By 1969, there were dozens of homophile organizations and publications in the U.S, and a national organization had been formed, but they were largely ignored by the media. A 1962 gay march held in front of Independence Hall in Philadelphia, according to some historians, marked the beginning of the modern gay rights movement. Meanwhile, in San Francisco, the LGBT youth organization Vanguard was formed by Adrian Ravarour to demonstrate for equality, and Vanguard members protested for equal rights during the months of April–July 1966, followed by the August 1966 Compton's riot, where transgender street prostitutes in the poor neighborhood of Tenderloin rioted against police harassment at a popular all-night restaurant, Gene Compton's Cafeteria.\n\nThe Wolfenden Report was published in Britain on 4 September 1957 after publicized convictions for homosexuality of well-known men, including Lord Montagu. Disregarding the conventional ideas of the day, the committee recommended that \"homosexual behaviour between consenting adults in private should no longer be a criminal offence\". All but James Adair were in favour of this and, contrary to some medical and psychiatric witnesses' evidence at that time, found that \"homosexuality cannot legitimately be regarded as a disease, because in many cases it is the only symptom and is compatible with full mental health in other respects.\" The report added, \"The law's function is to preserve public order and decency, to protect the citizen from what is offensive or injurious, and to provide sufficient safeguards against exploitation and corruption of others … It is not, in our view, the function of the law to intervene in the private life of citizens, or to seek to enforce any particular pattern of behaviour.\"\n\nThe report eventually led to the introduction of the Sexual Offences Bill 1967 supported by Labour MP Roy Jenkins, then the Labour Home Secretary. When passed, The Sexual Offences Act decriminalised homosexual acts between two men over 21 years of age \"in private\" in England and Wales.\n\nBisexual activism became more visible toward the end of the 1960s in the United States. In 1966 bisexual activist Robert A. Martin (a.k.a. Donny the Punk) founded the Student Homophile League at Columbia University and New York University. In 1967 Columbia University officially recognized this group, thus making them the first college in the United States to officially recognize a gay student group. Activism on behalf of bisexuals in particular also began to grow, especially in San Francisco. One of the earliest organizations for bisexuals, the Sexual Freedom League in San Francisco, was facilitated by Margo Rila and Frank Esposito beginning in 1967. Two years later, during a staff meeting at a San Francisco mental health facility serving LGBT people, nurse Maggi Rubenstein came out as bisexual. Due to this, bisexuals began to be included in the facility's programs for the first time.\n\nThe American Psychiatric Association removed \"homosexuality\" from the diagnostics manual of mental illness in 1973.\nThe new social movements of the sixties, such as the Black Power and anti-Vietnam war movements in the US, the May 1968 insurrection in France, and Women's Liberation throughout the Western world, inspired many LGBT activists to become more radical, and the Gay Liberation movement emerged towards the end of the decade. This new radicalism is often attributed to the Stonewall riots of 1969, when a group of transsexuals, lesbians, drag queens, and gay male patrons at a bar in New York resisted a police raid.\n\nImmediately after Stonewall, such groups as the Gay Liberation Front (GLF) and the Gay Activists' Alliance (GAA) were formed. Their use of the word \"gay\" represented a new unapologetic defiance—as an antonym for \"straight\" (\"respectable sexual behaviour\"), it encompassed a range of non-normative sexualities and gender expressions, including transgender street prostitutes, and sought ultimately to free the bisexual potential in everyone, rendering obsolete the categories of homosexual and heterosexual. According to Gay Lib writer Toby Marotta, \"their Gay political outlooks were not homophile but liberationist\". \"Out, loud and proud,\" they engaged in colourful street theatre. The GLF's \"A Gay Manifesto\" set out the aims for the fledgling gay liberation movement, and influential intellectual Paul Goodman published \"The Politics of Being Queer\" (1969). Chapters of the GLF were established across the U.S. and in other parts of the Western world. The Front Homosexuel d'Action Révolutionnaire was formed in 1971 by lesbians who split from the Mouvement Homophile de France.\n\nBisexual activist Brenda Howard is known as the \"\"Mother of Pride\"\" for her work in coordinating the first LGBT pride march; the march eventually occurred in New York in 1970. Howard also originated the idea for a week-long series of events around Pride Day which became the genesis of the annual LGBT Pride celebrations that are now held around the world every June. Additionally, Howard along with bisexual activist Robert A. Martin (a.k.a. Donny the Punk) and L. Craig Schoonmaker are credited with popularizing the word \"Pride\" to describe these festivities. As bisexual activist Tom Limoncelli put it, \"The next time someone asks you why LGBT Pride marches exist or why [LGBT] Pride Month is June tell them 'A bisexual woman named Brenda Howard thought it should be.'\"\n\nOne of the values of the movement was gay pride. Within weeks of the Stonewall Riots, Craig Rodwell, proprietor of the Oscar Wilde Memorial Bookshop in lower Manhattan, persuaded the Eastern Regional Conference of Homophile Organizations (ERCHO) to replace the Fourth of July Annual Reminder at Independence Hall in Philadelphia with a first commemoration of the Stonewall Riots. Liberation groups, including the Gay Liberation Front, Queens, the Gay Activists Alliance, Radicalesbians, and Street Transvestites Action Revolutionaries (STAR) all took part in the first Gay Pride Week. Los Angeles held a big parade on the first Gay Pride Day. Smaller demonstrations were held in San Francisco, Chicago, and Boston.\n\nIn the United Kingdom the GLF had its first meeting in the basement of the London School of Economics on 13 October 1970. Bob Mellors and Aubrey Walter had seen the effect of the GLF in the United States and created a parallel movement based on revolutionary politics and alternative lifestyle.\n\nBy 1971, the UK GLF was recognized as a political movement in the national press, holding weekly meetings of 200 to 300 people. The GLF Manifesto was published, and a series of high-profile direct actions, were carried out.\n\nThe disruption of the opening of the 1971 Festival of Light was the best organised of GLF action. The Festival of Light, whose leading figures included Mary Whitehouse, met at Methodist Central Hall. Groups of GLF members in drag invaded and spontaneously kissed each other; others released mice, sounded horns, and unveiled banners, and a contingent dressed as workmen obtained access to the basement and shut off the lights.\n\nIn 1971 the gay liberation movement in Germany, Austria and Switzerland started with Rosa von Praunheims movie It Is Not the Homosexual Who Is Perverse, But the Society in Which He Lives. \n\nEaster 1972 saw the Gay Lib annual conference held in the Guild of Undergraduates Union (students union) building at the University of Birmingham.\n\nBy 1974, internal disagreements had led to the movement's splintering. Organizations that spun off from the movement included the London Lesbian and Gay Switchboard, \"Gay News\", and Icebreakers. The GLF Information Service continued for a few further years providing gay related resources. GLF branches had been set up in some provincial British towns (e.g., Bradford, Bristol, Leeds, and Leicester) and some survived for a few years longer. The Leicester group founded by Jeff Martin was noted for its involvement in the setting up of the local \"Gayline\", which is still active today and has received funding from the National Lottery. They also carried out a high-profile campaign against the local paper, the \"Leicester Mercury\", which refused to advertise Gayline's services at the time.\n\nFrom 1970 activists protested the classification of homosexuality as a mental illness by the American Psychiatric Association in their Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, and in 1974 it was replaced with a category of \"sexual orientation disturbance\" then \"ego-dystonic homosexuality,\" which was also deleted, although \"gender identity disorder\" (a term used for Gender dysphoria) remains.\n\nIn 1972, Sweden became the first country in the world to allow people who were transsexual by legislation to surgically change their sex and provide free hormone replacement therapy. Sweden also permitted the age of consent for same-sex partners to be at age 15, making it equal to heterosexual couples.\n\nIn Japan, LGBT groups were established in the 1970s. In 1971, ran for the Upper House election.\n\nBisexuals became more visible in the LGBT rights movement in the 1970s. In 1972 a Quaker group, the Committee of Friends on Bisexuality, issued the \"Ithaca Statement on Bisexuality\" supporting bisexuals. In that same year the National Bisexual Liberation Group formed in New York. In 1976 the San Francisco Bisexual Center opened.\n\nFrom the anarchist Gay Liberation movement of the early 1970s arose a more reformist and single-issue Gay Rights movement, which portrayed gays and lesbians as a minority group and used the language of civil rights—in many respects continuing the work of the homophile period. In Berlin, for example, the radical Homosexuelle Aktion Westberlin was eclipsed by the Allgemeine Homosexuelle Arbeitsgemeinschaft.\n\nGay and lesbian rights advocates argued that one's sexual orientation does not reflect on one's gender; that is, \"you can be a man and desire a man... without any implications for your gender identity as a man,\" and the same is true if you are a woman. Gays and lesbians were presented as identical to heterosexuals in all ways but private sexual practices, and butch \"bar dykes\" and flamboyant \"street queens\" were seen as negative stereotypes of lesbians and gays. Veteran activists such as Sylvia Rivera and Beth Elliot were sidelined or expelled because they were transgender.\n\nIn 1974, Maureen Colquhoun came out as the first Lesbian MP for the Labour Party in the UK. When elected she was married in a heterosexual marriage.\n\nIn 1975, the groundbreaking film portraying homosexual gay icon Quentin Crisp's life, The Naked Civil Servant was transmitted by Thames Television for the British Television channel ITV. The British journal Gay Left also began publication. After British Home Stores sacked an openly gay trainee Tony Whitehead, a national campaign subsequently picketed their stores in protest.\n\nIn 1977, Harvey Milk was elected to the San Francisco Board of Supervisors becoming the first openly gay man in the United States elected to public office. Milk was assassinated by a former city supervisor Dan White in 1978.\n\nIn 1977, a former Miss America contestant and orange juice spokesperson, Anita Bryant, began a campaign \"Save Our Children,\" in Dade County, Florida (greater Miami), which proved to be a major set-back in the Gay Liberation movement. Essentially, she established an organization which put forth an amendment to the laws of the county which resulted in the firing of many public school teachers on the suspicion that they were homosexual.\n\nIn 1979, a number of people in Sweden called in sick with a case of \"being homosexual,\" in protest of homosexuality being classified as an illness. This was followed by an activist occupation of the main office of the \"National Board of Health and Welfare\". Within a few months, Sweden became the first country in the world to remove homosexuality as an illness.\n\nLesbian feminism, which was most influential from the mid-1970s to the mid-1980s, encouraged women to direct their energies toward other women rather than men, and advocated lesbianism as the logical result of feminism. As with Gay Liberation, this understanding of the lesbian potential in all women was at odds with the minority-rights framework of the Gay Rights movement. Many women of the Gay Liberation movement felt frustrated at the domination of the movement by men and formed separate organisations; some who felt gender differences between men and women could not be resolved developed \"lesbian separatism,\" influenced by writings such as Jill Johnston's 1973 book \"Lesbian Nation\". Organizers at the time focused on this issue. Diane Felix, also known as DJ Chili D in the Bay Area club scene, is a Latino American lesbian once joined the Latino American queer organization GALA. She was known for creating entertainment spaces specifically for queer women, especially in Latino American community. These places included gay bars in San Francisco such as A Little More and Colors. Disagreements between different political philosophies were, at times, extremely heated, and became known as the lesbian sex wars, clashing in particular over views on sadomasochism, prostitution and transsexuality. The term \"gay\" came to be more strongly associated with homosexual males.\n\nIn Canada, the coming into effect of Section 15 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms in 1985 saw a shift in the gay rights movement in Canada, as Canadian gays and lesbians moved from liberation to litigious strategies. Premised on Charter protections and on the notion of the immutability of homosexuality, judicial rulings rapidly advanced rights, including those that compelled the Canadian government to legalize same-sex marriage. It has been argued that while this strategy was extremely effective in advancing the safety, dignity and equality of Canadian homosexuals, its emphasis of sameness came at the expense of difference and may have undermined opportunities for more meaningful change.\n\nMark Segal, often referred to as the dean of American gay journalism, disrupted the CBS evening news with Walter Cronkite in 1973, an event covered in newspapers across the country and viewed by 60% of American households, many seeing or hearing about homosexuality for the first time.\n\nAnother setback in the United States occurred in 1986, when the US Supreme Court upheld a Georgia anti-sodomy law in the case \"Bowers v. Hardwick\". (This ruling would be overturned two decades later in \"Lawrence v. Texas).\n\nSome historians posit that a new era of the gay rights movement began in the 1980s with the emergence of AIDS, which decimated the leadership and shifted the focus for many. This era saw a resurgence of militancy with direct action groups like AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power (ACT UP), formed in 1987, as well as its offshoots Queer Nation (1990) and the Lesbian Avengers (1992). Some younger activists, seeing \"gay and lesbian\" as increasingly normative and politically conservative, began using \"queer\" as a defiant statement of all sexual minorities and gender variant people—just as the earlier liberationists had done with \"gay\". Less confrontational terms that attempt to reunite the interests of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people also became prominent, including various acronyms like \"LGBT\", \"LGBTQ\", and \"LGBTI\", where the \"Q\" and \"I\" stand for \"queer\" or \"questioning\" and \"intersex\", respectively.\n\nOn June 24, 1994, the first Gay Pride march was celebrated in Asia in the Philippines. In the Middle East, LGBT organizations remain illegal, and LGBT rights activists face extreme opposition from the state. The 1990s also saw the emergence of many LGBT youth movements and organizations such as LGBT youth centers, gay-straight alliances in high schools, and youth-specific activism, such as the National Day of Silence. Colleges also became places of LGBT activism and support for activists and LGBT people in general, with many colleges opening LGBT centers.\n\nThe 1990s also saw a rapid push of the transgender movement, while at the same time a \"sidelining of the identity of those who are transsexual.\" In the English-speaking world, Leslie Feinberg published \"Transgender Liberation: A Movement Whose Time Has Come\" in 1992. Gender-variant peoples across the globe also formed minority rights movements. Hijra activists campaigned for recognition as a third sex in India and Travesti groups began to organize against police brutality across Latin America while activists in the United States formed direct-confrontation groups such as the Transexual Menace.\n\nIn many cases, LGBT movements came to focus on questions of intersectionality, the interplay of oppressions arising from being both queer and underclass, colored, disabled, etc.\n\nThe Netherlands was the first country to allow same-sex marriage in 2001. As of 2016, same-sex marriages are also recognized in Sweden, Argentina, Belgium, Canada, Iceland, Ireland, Norway, South Africa, Spain, Portugal, Denmark, Uruguay, Brazil, France, Colombia, New Zealand, Mexico, Israel (though not performed there), United Kingdom, and the United States. During this same period, some municipalities have been enacting laws against homosexuality. E.g., Rhea County, Tennessee unsuccessfully tried to \"ban homosexuals\" in 2006.\n\nIn 2003, in the case Lawrence v. Texas, the Supreme Court of the United States struck down sodomy laws in fourteen states, making consensual homosexual sex legal in all 50 states, a significant step forward in LGBT activism and one that had been fought for by activists since the inception of modern LGBT social movements.\n\nFrom 6 to 9 November 2006, The Yogyakarta Principles on application of international human rights law in relation to sexual orientation and gender identity was adopted by an international meeting of 29 specialists, the International Commission of Jurists and the International Service for Human Rights.\nThe UN declaration on sexual orientation and gender identity was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 13 December 2008.\n\nOn 22 October 2009, the assembly of the Church of Sweden, voted strongly in favour of giving its blessing to homosexual couples, including the use of the term marriage, (\"matrimony\").\n\nIceland became the first country in the world to legalize same-sex marriage through a unanimous vote: 49-0, on 11 June 2010. A month later, Argentina became the first country in Latin America to legalize same-sex marriage.\n\nThe 1993 \"Don't ask, don't tell\" law, forbidding homosexual people from serving openly in the United States military, was repealed in 2010. This meant that gays and lesbians could now serve openly in the military without any fear of being discharged because of their sexual orientation. In 2012, the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development's Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity issued a regulation to prohibit discrimination in federally-assisted housing programs. The new regulations ensure that the Department's core housing programs are open to all eligible persons, regardless of sexual orientation or gender identity.\n\nIn early 2014 a series of protests organized by Add The Words, Idaho and former state senator Nicole LeFavour, some including civil disobedience and concomitant arrests, took place in Boise, Idaho which advocated adding the words \"sexual orientation\" and \"gender identity\" to the state's Human Rights act.\n\nOn June 26, 2015, the US Supreme Court ruled 5 to 4 that the Constitution requires that same-sex couples be allowed to marry no matter where they live in the United States. With this ruling, the United States became the 17th country to legalize same-sex marriages entirely.\n\nLGBT movements are opposed by a variety of individuals and organizations. They may have a personal, moral, political or religious objection to gay rights, homosexual relations or gay people. Opponents say same-sex relationships are not marriages, that legalization of same-sex marriage will open the door for the legalization of polygamy, that it is unnatural and that it encourages unhealthy behavior. Some social conservatives believe that all sexual relationships with people other than an opposite-sex spouse undermines the traditional family and that children should be reared in homes with both a father and a mother. Since society has become more accepting of homosexuality, there has been the emergence of many groups that desire to end homosexuality; during the 1990s, one of the best known groups that was established with this goal is the ex-gay movement.\nSome people worry that gay rights may conflict with individuals' freedom of speech, religious freedoms in the workplace, and the ability to run churches, charitable organizations and other religious organizations that hold opposing social and cultural views to LGBT rights. There is also concern that religious organizations might be forced to accept and perform same-sex marriages or risk losing their tax-exempt status.\n\nEric Rofes author of the book, \"A Radical Rethinking of Sexuality and Schooling: Status Quo or Status Queer?\", argues that the inclusion of teachings on homosexuality in public schools will play an important role in transforming public ideas about lesbian and gay individuals. As a former teacher in the public school system, Rofes recounts how he was fired from his teaching position after making the decision to come out as gay. As a result of the stigma that he faced as a gay teacher he emphasizes the necessity of the public to take radical approaches to making significant changes in public attitudes about homosexuality. According to Rofes, radical approaches are grounded in the belief that \"something fundamental needs to be transformed for authentic and sweeping changes to occur.\"The radical approaches proposed by Rofes have been met with strong opposition from anti-gay rights activists such as John Briggs. Former California senator, John Briggs proposed Proposition 6, a ballot initiative that would require that all California state public schools fire any gay or lesbian teachers or counselors, along with any faculty that displayed support for gay rights in an effort to prevent what he believe to be \" the corruption of the children's minds\". The exclusion of homosexuality from the sexual education curriculum, in addition to the absence of sexual counseling programs in public schools, has resulted in increased feelings of isolation and alienation for gay and lesbian students who desire to have gay counseling programs that will help them come to terms with their sexual orientation. Eric Rofes founder of youth homosexual programs, such as Out There and Committee for Gay Youth, stresses the importance of having support programs that help youth learn to identify with their sexual orientation.\n\nDavid Campos, author of the book, \"Sex, Youth, and Sex Education: A Reference Handbook\", illuminates the argument proposed by proponents of sexual education programs in public schools. Many gay rights supporters argue that teachings about the diverse sexual orientations that exist outside of heterosexuality are pertinent to creating students that are well informed about the world around them. However, Campos also acknowledges that the sex education curriculum alone cannot teach youth about factors associated with sexual orientation but instead he suggests that schools implement policies that create safe school learning environments and foster support for gay and lesbian, bisexual, and transgender youth. It is his belief that schools that provide unbiased, factual information about sexual orientation, along with supportive counseling programs for these homosexual youth will transform the way society treats homosexuality.\nMany opponents of LGBT social movements have attributed their indifference toward homosexuality as being a result of the immoral values that it may instill in children who are exposed to homosexual individuals. In opposition to this claim, many proponents of increased education about homosexuality suggest that educators should refrain from teaching about sexuality in schools entirely. In her book entitled \"Gay and Lesbian Movement,\" Margaret Cruickshank provides statistical data from the Harris and Yankelovich polls which confirmed that over 80% of American adults believe that students should be educated about sexuality within their public school. In addition, the poll also found that 75% of parents believe that homosexuality and abortion should be included in the curriculum as well. An assessment conducted on California public school systems discovered that only 2% of all parents actually disapproved of their child being taught about sexuality in school.\nIt had been suggested that education has a positive impact on support for same sex marriage. African Americans statistically have lower rates of educational achievement; however, the education level of African Americans does not have as much significance on their attitude towards same-sex marriage as it does on white attitudes. Educational attainment among whites has a significant positive effect on support for same-sex marriage, whereas the direct effect of education among African Americans is less significant. The income levels of whites have a direct and positive correlation with support for same-sex marriage, but African American income level is not significantly associated with attitudes toward same-sex marriage.\n\nLocation also affects ideas towards same-sex marriage; residents of rural and southern areas are significantly more opposed to same-sex marriage in comparison to residents elsewhere. Women are consistently more supportive than men of LGBT rights, and individuals that are divorced or have never married are also more likely to grant marital rights to same-sex couples than married or widowed individuals. Also, white women are significantly more supportive than white men, but there are no gender discrepancies among African Americans. The year in which one was born is a strong indicator of attitude towards same-sex marriage—generations born after 1946 are considerably more supportive of same-sex marriage than older generations. Statistics show that African Americans are more opposed to same-sex marriage than any other ethnicity.\n\nStudies show that Non-Protestants are much more likely to support same-sex unions than Protestants; 63% of African Americans claim that they are Baptist or Protestant, whereas only 30% of white Americans are. Religion, as measured by individuals' religious affiliations, behaviors, and beliefs, has a lot of influence in structuring same-sex union attitudes and consistently influences opinions about homosexuality. The most liberal attitudes are generally reflected by Jews, liberal Protestants, and people who are not affiliated with religion. This is because many of their religious traditions have not \"systematically condemned homosexual behaviors\" in recent years. Moderate and tolerant attitudes are generally reflected by Catholics and moderate Protestants. And lastly, the most conservative views are held by Evangelical Protestants. Moreover, it is a tendency for one to be less tolerant of homosexuality if their social network is strongly tied to a religious congregation. Organized religion, especially Protestant and Baptist affiliations, espouse conservative views which traditionally denounce same-sex unions. Therefore, these congregations are more likely to hear messages of this nature. Polls have also indicated that the amount and level of personal contact that individuals have with homosexual individuals and traditional morality affects attitudes of same-sex marriage and homosexuality.\n\nFiction literature also has an increased role in shaping people's attitude towards same-sex marriages. An original idea appears in Rafael Grugman dystopian fiction book \"Nontraditional Love\" (2008). He describes an inverted world in which mixed-sex marriages are forbidden. In this world intimacy between the opposite sexes is rejected, world history and the classics of world literature have been falsified in order to support the ideology of the homosexual world (in this world same-sex love is a traditional love). At the heart of the novel is a love story between a man and a woman who unfortunately were born as heterosexuals in a homosexual world and they forced to hide their feelings and their sexual orientation. For a homosexual society love between man and women is a non-traditional love. The author paints a grotesque situation, but underlying this story is the idea that society should be tolerant and accepting and respect the right of every person to be themselves. It is unusual approach that supports human rights of all people and same-sex marriages.\n\n\n", "id": "13070", "title": "LGBT social movements"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13072", "text": "Great Victoria Desert\n\nThe Great Victoria Desert, an interim Australian bioregion, is a sparsely populated desert area in Western Australia and South Australia.\n\nThe Great Victoria is the largest desert in Australia and consists of many small sandhills, grassland plains, areas with a closely packed surface of pebbles (called desert pavement or gibber plains) and salt lakes. It is over wide (from west to east) and covers an area of from the Eastern Goldfields region of Western Australia to the Gawler Ranges in South Australia. The Western Australia Mallee shrub ecoregion lies to the west, the Little Sandy Desert to the northwest, the Gibson Desert and the Central Ranges xeric shrublands to the north, the Tirari and Sturt Stony deserts to the east, while the Nullarbor Plain to the south separates it from the Southern Ocean. Average annual rainfall is low and irregular, ranging from per year. Thunderstorms are relatively common in the Great Victoria Desert, with an average of 15–20 thunderstorms per annum. Summer daytime temperatures range from while in winter, this falls to .\n\nThe majority of people living in the region are Indigenous Australians from different groups including the Kogara, the Mirning and the Pitjantjatjara. It is the part of Australia with the most populous and most healthy indigenous population. Aboriginal populations have been increasing in this region. Young Indigenous adults from the Great Victoria Desert region work in the Wilurarra Creative programs to maintain and develop their culture.\n\nDespite its isolated location the Great Victoria is bisected by very rough tracks including the Connie Sue Highway and the Anne Beadell Highway.\n\nHuman activity has included some mining and nuclear weapons testing.\n\nIn 1875, British explorer Ernest Giles became the first European to cross the desert. He named the desert after the then-reigning British monarch, Queen Victoria. In 1891, David Lindsey's expedition traveled across this area from north to south. Frank Hann was looking for gold in this area between 1903 and 1908. Len Beadell explored the area in the 1960s.\n\nThe Great Victoria desert is a World Wildlife Fund ecoregion and an Interim Biogeographic Regionalisation for Australia (IBRA) region of the same name.\n\nAs this area has had very limited use for agriculture, habitats remain largely undisturbed while parts of the desert are protected areas including Mamungari Conservation Park (formerly known as Unnamed Conservation Park) in South Australia, a large area of pristine arid zone wilderness which possesses cultural significance and is one of the fourteen World Biosphere Reserves in Australia. Habitat is also preserved in the large Aboriginal local government area of Anangu Pitjantjatjara Yankunytjatjara in South Australia and in the Great Victoria Desert Nature Reserve of Western Australia.\n\nThe nuclear weapons trials carried out by the United Kingdom at Maralinga and Emu Field in the 1950s and early 1960s have left areas contaminated with plutonium-239 and other radioactive material.\n\nOnly the hardiest of plants can survive in much of this environment. Between the sand ridges there are areas of wooded steppe consisting of \"Eucalyptus gongylocarpa\", \"Eucalyptus youngiana\" and mulga \"(Acacia aneura)\" shrubs scattered over areas of resilient spinifex grasses particularly Triodia basedowii.\n\nWildlife adapted to these harsh conditions includes few large birds or mammals. However, the desert does sustain many types of lizard including the vulnerable great desert skink (\"Egernia kintorei\") and a number of small marsupials including the endangered sandhill dunnart \"(Sminthopsis psammophila)\" and the crest-tailed mulgara \"(Dasycercus cristicauda)\". One way to survive here is to burrow into the sands, as a number of the desert's animals, including the southern marsupial mole \"(Notoryctes typhlops)\", and the water-holding frog do. Birds include the chestnut-breasted whiteface (\"Aphelocephala pectoralis\") found on the eastern edge of the desert and the malleefowl of Mamungari Conservation Park. Predators of the desert include the dingo (as the desert is north of the Dingo Fence) and two large monitor lizards, the perentie \"(Varanus giganteus)\" and the sand goanna \"(Varanus gouldii)\".\n\n", "id": "13072", "title": "Great Victoria Desert"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13073", "text": "GNU Lesser General Public License\n\nThe GNU Lesser General Public License (LGPL) is a free software license published by the Free Software Foundation (FSF). The license allows developers and companies to use and integrate software released under the LGPL into their own (even proprietary) software without being required by the terms of a strong copyleft license to release the source code of their own components. The license only requires software under the LGPL be modifiable by end users via source code availability. For proprietary software, code under the LGPL is usually used in the form of a shared library such as a DLL, so that there is a clear separation between the proprietary and LGPL components. The LGPL is primarily used for software libraries, although it is also used by some stand-alone applications. The license was originally called the GNU Library General Public License and was first published in 1991, and adopted the version number 2 for parity with GPL version 2. The LGPL was revised in minor ways in the 2.1 point release, published in 1999, when it was renamed the GNU Lesser General Public License to reflect the FSF's position that not all libraries should use it. Version 3 of the LGPL was published in 2007 as a list of additional permissions applied to GPL version 3. \n\nThe LGPL was developed as a compromise between the strong copyleft of the GNU General Public License (GPL) and more permissive licenses such as the BSD licenses and the MIT License. The word \"Lesser\" in the title shows that the LGPL does not guarantee the end user's complete freedom in the use of software; it only guarantees the freedom of modification for components licensed under the LGPL, but not for any proprietary components.\n\nThe license was originally called the GNU Library General Public License and was first published in 1991, and adopted the version number 2 for parity with GPL version 2. The LGPL was revised in minor ways in the 2.1 point release, published in 1999, when it was renamed the GNU Lesser General Public License to reflect the FSF's position that not all libraries should use it. Version 3 of the LGPL was published in 2007 as a list of additional permissions applied to GPL version 3.\n\nThe main difference between the GPL and the LGPL is that the latter allows the work to be linked with (in the case of a library, 'used by') a non-(L)GPLed program, regardless of whether it is free software or proprietary software. The non-(L)GPLed program can then be distributed under any terms if it is not a derivative work. If it is a derivative work, then the program's terms must allow for \"modification for the customer's own use and reverse engineering for debugging such modifications.\" Whether a work that uses an LGPL program is a derivative work or not is a legal issue. A standalone executable that dynamically links to a library through a .so, .dll, or similar medium is generally accepted as not being a derivative work as defined by the LGPL. It would fall under the definition of a \"work that uses the Library\". Paragraph 5 of the LGPL version 2.1 states:\n\nEssentially, if it is a \"work that uses the library\", then it must be possible for the software to be linked with a newer version of the LGPL-covered program. The most commonly used method for doing so is to use \"a suitable shared library mechanism for linking\". Alternatively, a statically linked library is allowed if either source code or linkable object files are provided.\n\nOne feature of the LGPL is the permission to relicense under the GPL any piece of software which is received under the LGPL (see section 3 of the LGPL version 2.1, and section 2 option b of the LGPL version 3). This feature allows for direct reuse of LGPLed code in GPLed libraries and applications.\n\nVersion 3 of the LGPL is not inherently compatible with version 2 of the GPL. However, works using the latter that have given permission to use a later version of the GPL are compatible: a work released under the GPLv2 \"or any later version\" may be combined with code from a LGPL version 3 library, with the combined work as a whole falling under the terms of the GPLv3.\n\nThe former name \"GNU Library General Public License\" gave some the impression that the FSF recommended software libraries use the LGPL and that programs use the GPL. In February 1999, GNU Project leader Richard Stallman wrote the essay \"Why you shouldn't use the Lesser GPL for your next library\" explaining that the LGPL had not been deprecated, but that one should not \"necessarily\" use the LGPL for all libraries:\n\nStallman and the FSF sometimes advocate licenses even less restrictive than the LGPL as a matter of strategy. A prominent example was Stallman's endorsement of the use of a BSD-style license by the Vorbis project for use in its libraries.\n\nThe license uses terminology which is mainly intended for applications written in the C programming language or its family. Franz Inc. published its own preamble to the license to clarify terminology in the Lisp context. LGPL with this preamble is sometimes referred as LLGPL.\n\nIn addition, Ada has a special feature, , which may prompt the use of GNAT Modified General Public License: it allows code to link against or instantiate GMGPL-covered units without the code itself becoming covered by the GPL.\n\nSome concern has risen about the suitability of object-oriented classes in LGPL'd software being inherited by non-(L)GPL code. Clarification is given on the official GNU website:\n\n\n", "id": "13073", "title": "GNU Lesser General Public License"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13075", "text": "Gosford\n\nGosford is a city located on the Central Coast of New South Wales, Australia, about 76 km north of the Sydney central business district. The city is situated at the northern extremity of Brisbane Water, an extensive northern branch of the Hawkesbury River estuary and Broken Bay.\n\nThe city is the administrative centre of the Central Coast region, which is the third largest urban area in New South Wales after Sydney and Newcastle. Gosford has been designated as an important growth centre under the NSW Metropolitan Strategy. The suburb's population was 3,392 in the 2011 census.\n\nUntil white settlement, the area around Gosford was inhabited by the Guringai peoples, who were principally coastal-dwellers, and the Darginüng people that inhabited the hinterland. \nAlong with the other land around the Hawkesbury River estuary, the Brisbane Water district was explored during the early stages of the settlement of New South Wales. In the early 19th century some pioneering European settlers began occupying the land, for timber-cutting (mainly ironbark and Australian red cedar), lime production and grazing. \n\nGosford itself was explored by Governor Phillip between 1788 and 1789. The area was difficult to access and settlement did not start before 1823. By the late 19th century the agriculture in the region was diversifying, with market gardens and citrus orchards occupying the rich soil left after the timber harvest. The road between Hawkesbury (near Pittwater) and Brisbane Water was a cart wheel track even in 1850.\nConvicts once lived and worked in the Gosford area. In 1825, Gosford's population reached 100, of whom 50% were convicts.\n\nEast Gosford was the first centre of settlement. Gosford was named in 1839 after Archibald Acheson, 2nd Earl of Gosford – a friend of the then Governor of New South Wales George Gipps. Acheson's title derives its name from Gosford, a townland (sub-division) of Markethill in County Armagh in Northern Ireland.\n\nIn 1887, the rail link to Sydney was completed, requiring a bridge over the Hawkesbury River and a tunnel through the sandstone ridge west of Woy Woy. The introduction of this transport link and then the Pacific Highway in 1930 accelerated the development of the region.\n\nGosford became a town in 1885 and was declared a municipality in 1886.\n\nIn the 2011 Census, the most common countries of birth of people in Gosford were Australia 63.6%, England 4.4%, Mainland China 2.4%, India 1.9%, New Zealand 1.9% and South Korea 1.1%. The most common responses for religion were No Religion 24.3%, Catholic 21.6%, Anglican 18.0%, Buddhism 3.4% and Uniting Church 2.8%.\n\nGosford Community News has been published fortnightly by Ducks Crossing Publications since 2010.\n\nExpress Advocate: News Limited publish a free weekly suburban style newspaper in the News Local group.\n\n\nGosford has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification: Cfa) with warm summers and mild winters. In summer, temperatures average about 27-28 °C in the day with high humidity and about 17-18 °C at night. Winters are mild with cool overnight temperatures and mild to occasionally warm daytime temperatures with lower humidity. Average rainfall is 1333mm, much of which falls in the late summer and autumn. Records range from a maximum of on 18 January 2013, to a low of on 16 July 1970.\n\nGosford proper is located in a valley with President's Hill on the city's western border, Rumbalara Reserve on its eastern border, and Brisbane water to the city's south. Mann Street, Gosford's main street and part of the Pacific Highway, runs north-south and contains the frontage for much of the commercial district. The Central Coast Highway runs past Gosford's waterfront area, while its predecessor the Pacific Highway takes on several names through the CBD itself. Mann Street contains the main public transport links for Gosford, including Gosford railway station and the termini for several bus routes.\n\nIn the centre of Gosford is a shopping and community precinct, including Kibble Park, William Street Mall, Gosford City Library, the Imperial Shopping Centre, the Gosford Town Shopping Centre and a full range of shops, cafes, banks and services, especially along William Street Mall.\n\nThe Gosford CBD suffered a decline in the 1990s as commercial activity relocated to nearby Erina, particularly Erina Fair. To address this, the city has more recently redeveloped its park in the city centre, including a stream, a restaurant and outdoor performance facilities. This will be the beginning of the redevelopment of the CBD. A small number of high rise developments have also been built in the area to encourage a concentration of residents in a bid to stimulate the economy of local business. More high rise developments are planned.\n\nA renewed period of optimism has followed several infrastructure investment projects including the full fibre optic telecommunications rollout of the National Broadband Network in 2012 in the city's CBD as well as the so-called Kibbleplex project, announced in 2013 that plans to house the new regional library, tertiary teaching rooms and associated organisations.\n\nGosford is home to:\n\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "13075", "title": "Gosford"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13076", "text": "Gordon Brown\n\nJames Gordon Brown, (born 20 February 1951) is a British politician who was the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom and the Leader of the Labour Party from 2007 to 2010. He previously served as Chancellor of the Exchequer in the Blair Government from 1997 to 2007. Brown was a Member of Parliament (MP) from 1983 to 2015, first for Dunfermline East and later for Kirkcaldy and Cowdenbeath.\n\nA doctoral graduate of the University of Edinburgh, Brown spent his early career working as both a lecturer at a further education college and a television journalist. He entered Parliament in 1983 as the MP for Dunfermline East. He joined the Shadow Cabinet in 1989 as Shadow Secretary of State for Trade, and was later promoted to become Shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer in 1992. After Labour's victory in 1997, he was appointed Chancellor of the Exchequer, becoming the longest-serving holder of that office in modern history.\n\nBrown's time as Chancellor was marked by major reform of Britain's monetary and fiscal policy architecture, transferring interest rate setting powers to the Bank of England, by a wide extension of the powers of the Treasury to cover much domestic policy and by transferring responsibility for banking supervision to the Financial Services Authority. Controversial moves included the abolition of advance corporation tax (ACT) relief in his first budget, and the removal in his final budget of the 10% \"starting rate\" of personal income tax which he had introduced in 1999. In 2007, Tony Blair resigned as Prime Minister and Labour Leader and Brown was chosen to replace him in an uncontested election.\n\nAfter initial rises in opinion polls following Brown becoming Prime Minister, Labour's popularity declined with the onset of a recession in 2008, leading to poor results in the local and European elections in 2009. A year later, Labour lost 91 seats in the House of Commons at the 2010 general election, the party's biggest loss of seats in a single general election since 1931, making the Conservatives the largest party in a hung parliament. Brown remained in office as Labour negotiated to form a coalition government with the Liberal Democrats. On 10 May 2010, Brown announced he would stand down as leader of the Labour Party, and instructed the party to put into motion the processes to elect a new leader. Labour's attempts to retain power failed and on 11 May, he officially resigned as Prime Minister and Leader of the Labour Party. He was succeeded as Prime Minister by David Cameron, and as Leader of the Labour Party by Ed Miliband.\n\nLater, Brown played a prominent role in the campaign surrounding the Scottish independence referendum of 2014, galvanising support behind maintaining the union.\n\nBrown was born at the Orchard Maternity Nursing Home in Giffnock, Renfrewshire, Scotland. His father was John Ebenezer Brown, a minister of the Church of Scotland and a strong influence on Brown. He died in December 1998, aged 84. His mother, Jessie Elizabeth Brown ( Souter), known as Bunty, died on 19 September 2004, aged 86. She was the daughter of John Souter, a timber merchant. The family moved to Kirkcaldy – then the largest town in Fife, across the Firth of Forth from Edinburgh – when Gordon was three. Brown was brought up there with his elder brother John and younger brother Andrew Brown in a manse. In common with many other notable Scots, he is therefore often referred to as a \"son of the manse\".\n\nBrown was educated first at Kirkcaldy West Primary School where he was selected for an experimental fast stream education programme, which took him two years early to Kirkcaldy High School for an academic hothouse education taught in separate classes. At age sixteen he wrote that he loathed and resented this \"ludicrous\" experiment on young lives.\n\nHe was accepted by the University of Edinburgh to study history at the same early age of sixteen. During an end-of-term rugby union match at his old school, he received a kick to the head and suffered a retinal detachment. This left him blind in his left eye, despite treatment including several operations and weeks spent lying in a darkened room. Later at Edinburgh, while playing tennis, he noticed the same symptoms in his right eye. Brown underwent experimental surgery at the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary and his right eye was saved. Brown graduated from Edinburgh with First-Class Honours MA degree in history in 1972, and stayed on to obtain his PhD degree in history (which he gained ten years later in 1982), titled \"The Labour Party and Political Change in Scotland 1918–29\".\n\nIn his youth at the University of Edinburgh, Brown was involved in a romantic relationship with Margarita, Crown Princess of Romania. Margarita said about it: \"It was a very solid and romantic story. I never stopped loving him but one day it didn't seem right any more, it was politics, politics, politics, and I needed nurturing.\" An unnamed friend of those years is quoted by Paul Routledge in his biography of Brown as recalling: \"She was sweet and gentle and obviously cut out to make somebody a very good wife. She was bright, too, though not like him, but they seemed made for each other.\"\n\nIn 1972, while still a student, Brown was elected Rector of the University of Edinburgh, the convener of the University Court. He served as Rector until 1975, and also edited the document \"The Red Paper on Scotland\".\n\nFrom 1976 to 1980 Brown was employed as a lecturer in politics at Glasgow College of Technology. He also worked as a tutor for the Open University. In the 1979 general election, Brown stood for the Edinburgh South constituency, losing to the Conservative candidate, Michael Ancram.\n\nFrom 1980, he worked as a journalist at Scottish Television, later serving as current affairs editor until his election to Parliament in 1983.\n\nBrown was elected to Parliament on his second attempt as a Labour MP for Dunfermline East in 1983 general election. His first Westminster office mate was a newly elected MP from the Sedgefield constituency, Tony Blair. Brown became an opposition spokesman on Trade and Industry in 1985. In 1986, he published a biography of the Independent Labour Party politician James Maxton, the subject of his doctoral thesis. Brown was Shadow Chief Secretary to the Treasury from 1987 to 1989 and then Shadow Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, before becoming Shadow Chancellor in 1992. Having led the \"Labour Movement Yes\" campaign, refusing to join the cross-party \"Yes for Scotland\" campaign, during the 1979 Scottish devolution referendum, while other senior Labour politicians – including Robin Cook, Tam Dalyell and Brian Wilson – campaigned for a \"No\" vote, Brown was subsequently a key participant in the Scottish Constitutional Convention, signing the Claim of Right for Scotland in 1989.\n\nAfter the sudden death of Labour leader John Smith in May 1994, Brown did not contest the leadership after Tony Blair became favourite, deciding to make way for Blair to avoiding splitting the pro-modernising vote in the leadership ballot.\n\nIt has long been rumoured a deal was struck between Blair and Brown at the former Granita restaurant in Islington, in which Blair promised to give Brown control of economic policy in return for Brown not standing against him in the leadership election. Whether this is true or not, the relationship between Blair and Brown was central to the fortunes of New Labour, and they mostly remained united in public, despite reported serious private rifts.\n\nAs Shadow Chancellor, Brown as Chancellor-in-waiting was seen as a good choice by business and the middle class. While he was Chancellor inflation sometimes exceeded the 2% target causing the Governor of the Bank of England to write several letters to the Chancellor, each time inflation exceeded three per cent.\nIn 2005 following a reorganisation of Westminster constituencies in Scotland, Brown became MP for Kirkcaldy and Cowdenbeath at the general election.\n\nIn the 1997 general election, Labour defeated the Conservatives by a landslide to end their 18-year exile from government, and when Tony Blair, the new Prime Minister, announced his ministerial team on 2 May 1997, he appointed Brown as Chancellor of the Exchequer. Brown would remain in this role for 10 years and two months, making him the longest-serving Chancellor in modern history. The Prime Minister's website highlights some achievements from Brown's decade as Chancellor: making the Bank of England independent and delivering an agreement on poverty and climate change at the G8 summit in 2005.\nOn taking office as Chancellor of the Exchequer Brown gave the Bank of England operational independence in monetary policy, and thus responsibility for setting interest rates through the Bank's Monetary Policy Committee. At the same time he also changed the inflation measure from the Retail Price Index to the Consumer Price Index and transferred responsibility for banking supervision to the Financial Services Authority. Some commentators have argued that this division of responsibilities exacerbated the severity in Britain of the 2007 global banking crisis.\n\nIn the 1997 election and subsequently, Brown pledged not to increase the basic or higher rates of income tax. Over his Chancellorship, he reduced the basic rate from 23% to 20%. However, in all but his final budget, Brown increased the tax thresholds in line with inflation, rather than earnings, resulting in fiscal drag. Corporation tax fell under Brown, from a main rate of 33% to 28%, and from 24% to 19% for small businesses. In 1999, he introduced a lower tax band of 10%. He abolished this 10% tax band in his last budget in 2007 to reduce the basic rate from 22% to 20%, increasing tax for 5 million people and, according to the calculations of the Institute for Fiscal Studies, leaving those earning between £5,000 and £18,000 as the biggest losers. To backbench cheers, Brown had described the measure in his last Budget thus: \"Having put in place more focused ways of incentivising work and directly supporting children and pensioners at a cost of £3bn a year, I can now return income tax to just two rates by removing the 10p band on non savings income\".\n\nAccording to the OECD UK taxation increased from a 39.3% share of gross domestic product in 1997 to 42.4% in 2006, going to a higher level than that of Germany. This increase has mainly been attributed to active government policy, and not simply to the growing economy. Conservatives have accused Brown of imposing \"stealth taxes\". A commonly reported example resulted in 1997 from a technical change in the way corporation tax is collected, the indirect effect of which was for the dividends on stock investments held within pensions to be taxed, thus lowering pension returns and contributing to the demise of most of the final salary pension funds in the UK. The Treasury contends that this tax change was crucial to long-term economic growth.\n\nBrown's 2000 Spending Review outlined a major expansion of government spending, particularly on health and education. In his April 2002 budget, Brown increased National Insurance to pay for health spending. He also introduced working tax credits, and in his last budget as Chancellor, Brown gave an extra £3 billion in pension allowances, an increase in the child tax credit, and an increase in the working tax credit. These increases were followed by another £1 billion of support for increases in the child tax credit.\n\nUnder Brown the standard guide to tax doubled in length.\n\nIn October 1997, Brown took control of the United Kingdom's membership of the European single currency issue by announcing the Treasury would set five economic tests to ascertain whether the economic case had been made. In June 2003 the Treasury indicated the tests had not been passed.\n\nIn 2000, Brown was accused of starting a political row about higher education (referred to as the Laura Spence Affair) when he accused the University of Oxford of elitism in its admissions procedures, describing its decision not to offer a place to state school pupil Laura Spence as \"absolutely outrageous\". Lord Jenkins, then Oxford Chancellor and himself a former Labour Chancellor of the Exchequer, said \"nearly every fact he used was false.\"\n\nBetween 1999 and 2002 Brown sold 60% of the UK's gold reserves shortly before gold entered a protracted bull market, since nicknamed by dealers as Brown Bottom. The official reason for selling the gold reserves was to reduce the portfolio risk of the UK's reserves by diversifying away from gold. The UK eventually sold about 395 tons of gold over 17 auctions from July 1999 to March 2002, at an average price of about US$275 per ounce, raising approximately US$3.5 billion. By 2011, that quantity of gold would be worth over $19 billion, leading to Brown's decision to sell the gold being widely criticised.\n\nAs Chancellor, Brown argued against renationalising the railways, saying at the Labour conference in 2004 that it would cost £22 billion.\n\nDuring his time as Chancellor, Brown reportedly believed that it was appropriate to remove most, but not all, of the unpayable Third World debt. On 20 April 2006, in a speech to the United Nations Ambassadors, Brown outlined a \"Green\" view of global development.\n\nIn October 2004, Tony Blair announced he would not lead the party into a fourth general election, but would serve a full third term. Political comment over the relationship between Brown and Blair continued up to and beyond the 2005 election, which Labour won with a reduced majority and reduced vote share. Blair announced on 7 September 2006 that he would step down within a year. Brown was the clear favourite to succeed Blair; he was the only candidate spoken of seriously in Westminster. Appearances and news coverage leading up to the handover were interpreted as preparing the ground for Brown to become Prime Minister, in part by creating the impression of a statesman with a vision for leadership and global change. This enabled Brown to signal the most significant priorities for his agenda as Prime Minister; speaking at a Fabian Society conference on 'The Next Decade' in January 2007, he stressed education, international development, narrowing inequalities (to pursue 'equality of opportunity and fairness of outcome'), renewing Britishness, restoring trust in politics, and winning hearts and minds in the war on terror as key priorities.\n\nBrown ceased to be Chancellor and became the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom on 27 June 2007. Like all modern Prime Ministers, Brown concurrently served as the First Lord of the Treasury and the Minister for the Civil Service, and was a member of the Cabinet of the United Kingdom. Until his resignation from the post in May 2010 he was Leader of the Labour Party. He was Member of Parliament for the constituency of Kirkcaldy and Cowdenbeath until he stepped down in 2015. He is the sixth post-war Prime Minister, of a total of 12, to assume the role without having won a general election.\nBrown was the first Prime Minister from a Scottish constituency since the Conservative Sir Alec Douglas-Home in 1964. Not all British prime ministers have attended university, but of the ones that did Brown was one of only five that did not attend either Oxford or Cambridge, the others were, Lord Bute (Leiden), Lord John Russell (Edinburgh), Bonar Law (Glasgow), and Neville Chamberlain (Mason Science College, later Birmingham). Brown proposed moving some traditional prime ministerial powers conferred by royal prerogative to the realm of Parliament, such as the power to declare war and approve appointments to senior positions. Brown wanted Parliament to gain the right to ratify treaties and have more oversight into the intelligence services. He also proposed moving some powers from Parliament to citizens, including the right to form \"citizens' juries\", easily petition Parliament for new laws, and rally outside Westminster. He asserted that the attorney general should not have the right to decide whether to prosecute in individual cases, such as in the loans for peerages scandal.\n\nThere was speculation during September and early October 2007 about whether Brown would call a snap general election. Indeed, the party launched the \"Not Flash, Just Gordon\" advertising campaign, which was seen largely as pre-election promotion of Brown as Prime Minister. However, Brown announced on 6 October that there would be no election any time soon – despite opinion polls showing that he was capable of winning an election should he call one. This proved to be a costly mistake, as during 2008 his party slid behind the Conservatives (led by David Cameron) in the polls. Disputes over political donations, a string of losses in local elections, and by-election losses in Crewe and Glasgow did himself and the government no favours either.\n\nHis political opponents accused him of being indecisive, which Brown denied. In July 2008 Brown supported a new bill extending the pre-charge detention period to 42 days. The bill was met with opposition on both sides of the House and backbench rebellion. In the end the bill passed by just 9 votes. The House of Lords defeated the bill, with Lords characterising it as \"fatally flawed, ill thought through and unnecessary\", stating that \"it seeks to further erode fundamental legal and civil rights\".\n\nBrown was mentioned by the press in the expenses crisis for claiming for the payment of his cleaner. However, no wrongdoing was found and the Commons Authority did not pursue Brown over the claim. Meanwhile, the Commons Fees Office stated that a double payment for a £153 plumbing repair bill was a mistake on their part and that Brown had repaid it in full.\n\nDuring his Labour leadership campaign Brown proposed some policy initiatives which he called the \"manifesto for change.\"\n\nThe manifesto included a clampdown on corruption and a new Ministerial Code, which set out clear standards of behaviour for ministers. Brown also stated in a speech when announcing his bid that he wants a \"better constitution\" that is \"clear about the rights and responsibilities of being a citizen in Britain today\". He planned to set up an all-party convention to look at new powers for Parliament and to look at rebalancing powers between Whitehall and local government. Brown said he would give Parliament the final say on whether British troops are sent into action in future.\n\nBrown said he wanted to release more land and ease access to ownership with shared equity schemes. He backed a proposal to build new eco-towns, each housing between 10,000 and 20,000 home-owners – up to 100,000 new homes in total.\nBrown also said he wanted to have doctors' surgeries open at the weekends, and GPs on call in the evenings. Doctors were given the right of opting out of out-of-hours care in 2007, under a controversial pay deal, signed by then-Health Secretary John Reid, which awarded them a 22 percent pay rise in 2006. Brown also stated in the manifesto that the NHS was his top priority.\n\nOn 5 June 2007, just three weeks before he was due to take the post of Prime Minister, Brown made a speech promising \"British Jobs for British workers\". Brown reiterated that promise at the Labour Party's annual conference in September, which caused controversy as he coupled this with a commitment to crack down on migrant workers. The Conservative Party, led by David Cameron, promptly pointed out that such a commitment was illegal under EU law.\n\nBrown was committed to the Iraq War, but said in a speech in June 2007 that he would \"learn the lessons\" from the mistakes made in Iraq. Brown said in a letter published on 17 March 2008 that the United Kingdom would hold an inquiry into the war. He is also a member of the lobby group, Labour Friends of Israel.\n\nBrown went to great lengths to empathise with those who lost family members in the Iraq and Afghanistan conflicts. He has often said \"War is tragic\", echoing Blair's quote, \"War is horrible\". Nonetheless, in November 2007 Brown was accused by some senior military figures of not adhering to the Military Covenant, a convention within British politics ensuring adequate safeguards, rewards and compensation for military personnel who risk their lives in obedience to orders derived from the policy of the elected government.\n\nBrown skipped the opening ceremony of the 2008 Summer Olympics, on 8 August 2008 in Beijing. He attended the closing ceremony instead, on 24 August 2008. Brown had been under intense pressure from human rights campaigners to send a message to China, concerning the 2008 Tibetan unrest. His decision not to attend the opening ceremony was not an act of protest, but rather was made several weeks in advance and not intended as a stand on principle.\n\nIn a speech in July 2007, Brown clarified his position regarding Britain's relationship with the USA \"We will not allow people to separate us from the United States of America in dealing with the common challenges that we face around the world. I think people have got to remember that the special relationship between a British prime minister and an American president is built on the things that we share, the same enduring values about the importance of liberty, opportunity, the dignity of the individual. I will continue to work, as Tony Blair did, very closely with the American administration.\"\n\nBrown and the Labour party had pledged to allow a referendum on the EU Treaty of Lisbon. On 13 December 2007, Foreign Secretary David Miliband attended for the Prime Minister at the official signing ceremony in Lisbon of the EU Reform Treaty. Brown's opponents on both sides of the House, and in the press, suggested that ratification by Parliament was not enough and that a referendum should also be held. Labour's 2005 manifesto had pledged to give British public a referendum on the original EU Constitution. Brown argued that the Treaty significantly differed from the Constitution, and as such did not require a referendum. He also responded with plans for a lengthy debate on the topic, and stated that he believed the document to be too complex to be decided by referendum.\n\nDuring Brown's premiership, in October 2008, the Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs (ACMD) recommended to the then Home Secretary Jacqui Smith that cannabis remain classified as a Class C drug. Acting against the advice of the Council, she chose to reclassify it as Class B. After Professor David Nutt, the chair of the ACMD, criticised this move in a lecture in 2009, he was asked to step down by then Home Secretary Alan Johnson. Following his resignation, Professor Nutt said Brown had \"made up his mind\" to reclassify cannabis despite evidence to the contrary. Brown had argued, \"I don't think that the previous studies took into account that so much of the cannabis on the streets is now of a lethal quality and we really have got to send out a message to young people—this is not acceptable\". Professor Nutt's predecessor at the ACMD, Sir Michael Rawlins, later said, \"Governments may well have good reasons for taking an alternative view ... When that happens, then the government should explain why it's ignoring the particular advice\".\n\nBrown's premiership coincided with the global recession, during which Brown called for fiscal action in an attempt to stimulate aggregate demand. Domestically, Brown's administration introduced measures including a bank rescue package worth around £500 billion (approximately $850 billion), a temporary 2.5% cut in value-added tax and a \"car scrappage\" scheme.\n\nIn mid-2008, Brown's leadership was presented with a challenge as some MPs openly called for him to resign. This event was dubbed the 'Lancashire Plot', as two backbenchers from (pre-1974) Lancashire urged him to step down and a third questioned his chances of holding on to the Labour Party leadership. Several MPs argued that if Brown did not recover in the polls by early 2009, he should call for a leadership contest. However, certain prominent MPs, such as Jacqui Smith and Bill Rammell, suggested that Brown was the right person to lead Britain through its economic crisis. In the Autumn, Siobhain McDonagh, a MP and junior government whip, who during her time in office had never voted against the government, spoke of the need for discussion over Brown's position. McDonagh was sacked from her role shortly afterwards, on 12 September. Whilst McDonagh did not state that she wanted Brown deposed, she implored the Labour party to hold a leadership election, she was sacked from her role shortly afterwards. McDonagh was supported by Joan Ryan (who applied, as McDonagh had, for leadership nomination papers, and became the second rebel to be fired from her job), Jim Dowd, Greg Pope, and a string of others who had previously held positions in government, made clear their desire for a contest.\nIn the face of this speculation over Brown's future, his ministers backed him to lead the party, and Harriet Harman and David Miliband denied that they were preparing leadership bids. After Labour lost the Glasgow East by-election in July, Harman, the deputy leader of the party, said that Brown was the \"solution\", not the \"problem\"; Home Secretary Smith, Justice Secretary Jack Straw, Schools Secretary Ed Balls and Cabinet Office Minister Ed Miliband all re-affirmed their support for Brown. The deputy Prime Minister under Blair, John Prescott, also pledged his support. Foreign Secretary David Miliband then denied that he was plotting a leadership bid, when on 30 July, an article written by him in \"The Guardian\" was interpreted by a large number in the media as an attempt to undermine Brown. In the article, Miliband outlined the party's future, but neglected to mention the Prime Minister. Miliband, responded to this by saying that he was confident Brown could lead Labour to victory in the next general election, and that his article was an attack against the fatalism in the party since the loss of Glasgow-East. Miliband continued to show his support for Brown in the face of the challenge that emerged in September, as did Business Secretary John Hutton, Environment Secretary Hilary Benn, and Chief Whip Geoff Hoon.\n\nOn 6 January 2010, Patricia Hewitt and Geoff Hoon jointly called for a secret ballot on the future of Brown's leadership. The call received little support and the following day Hoon said that it appeared to have failed and was \"over\". Brown later referred to the call for a secret ballot as a \"form of silliness\".\n\nIn the local elections on 1 May 2008, Labour suffered their worst results in 40 years finishing in third place with a projected 24% share of the national vote. Subsequently, the party has seen the loss of by-elections in Nantwich and Crewe and Henley as well as slumps in the polls. A by-election in Glasgow East triggered by the resignation of David Marshall saw the Labour party struggle to appoint a candidate, eventually settling for Margaret Curran, a sitting MSP in the Scottish Parliament. The SNP, Conservatives and Liberal Democrats all derided Labour for their disorganised nature, with Alex Salmond commenting \"This is their 'lost weekend'—they don't have a leader in Scotland, they don't have a candidate in Glasgow East, and they have a prime minister who refuses to come to the constituency\". Labour lost the constituency to the Scottish National Party's John Mason who took 11,277 votes with Labour just 365 behind. The seat experienced a swing of 22.54%.\n\nIn the European elections, Labour polled 16% of the vote, finishing in third place behind the Conservatives and UK Independence Party (UKIP). Voter apathy was reflected in the historically low turnout of around thirty three percent. In Scotland voter turnout was only twenty eight per cent. In the local elections, Labour polled 23% of the vote, finishing in third place behind Conservatives and Liberal Democrats, with Labour losing control of the four councils it had held prior to the election. In a vote widely considered to be a reaction to the expenses scandal, the share of the votes was down for all the major parties; Labour was down one percent, the Conservative share was down five percent. The beneficiary of the public backlash was generally seen to be the minor parties, including the Green Party and UKIP. These results were Labour's worst since World War II. Brown was quoted in the press as having said that the results were \"a painful defeat for Labour\", and that \"too many good people doing so much good for their communities and their constituencies have lost through no fault of their own.\"\n\nIn April 2010, Brown asked the Queen to dissolve Parliament. The General Election campaign included the first televised leadership debates in Britain. The result of the election on 6 May was a hung parliament. Brown was re-elected as MP for Kirkcaldy and Cowdenbeath with 29,559 votes.\n\nBrown announced on 10 May 2010 that he would stand down as Labour Leader, with a view to a successor being chosen before the next Labour Party Conference in September 2010. The following day, negotiations between the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats to form a coalition government failed. During the evening, Brown visited Buckingham Palace to tender his resignation as Prime Minister to Queen Elizabeth II and to recommend that she invite the Leader of the Opposition, David Cameron, to form a government. He resigned as leader of the Labour Party with immediate effect.\n\nOn 13 May 2010, in his first public appearance since leaving 10 Downing Street, two days after resigning as Prime Minister and Leader of the Labour Party, Brown confirmed he intended to stay on in Parliament, serving as a Labour backbencher, to serve the people of his Kirkcaldy and Cowdenbeath constituency.\n\nTowards the end of May 2010, Brown began writing \"Beyond the Crash\", completing it after 14 weeks. The book discusses the 2007–08 financial crisis and Brown's recommendations for future co-ordinated global action.\n\nHe played a prominent role in the lead-up to, and the aftermath of, the 2014 Scottish independence referendum.\n\nOn 1 December 2014, Brown announced that he would not be seeking re-election to parliament. He stood down at the General Election in May 2015.\n\nIn April 2011, media reports linked Brown with the role as the next managing director of the International Monetary Fund following the scheduled retirement of Dominique Strauss-Kahn. Brown's successor and Leader of the Opposition, Ed Miliband, supported Brown for the role while the Prime Minister, David Cameron, voiced opposition to this. Following the arrest of Strauss-Kahn for alleged sexual assault in May 2011, and his subsequent resignation, these reports re-surfaced. Support for Brown among economists was mixed but British Government backing for his candidature was not forthcoming and instead supported Christine Lagarde – the eventual successful candidate – for the post.\nSir Tim Berners-Lee, who had worked with the government during Brown's premiership to publish government data on the internet in the data.gov.uk project, subsequently invited Brown to become a board director of the World Wide Web Foundation to \"advise the Web Foundation on ways to involve disadvantaged communities and global leaders in the development of sustainable programs that connect humanity and affect positive change\". On 22 April 2011 it was announced that Brown would be taking on an unpaid advisory role at the World Economic Forum. Brown was also appointed as the inaugural 'Distinguished Leader in Residence' by New York University and has already taken part in discussions and lectures relating to the global financial crisis and globalisation.\n\nIn July 2012 Brown was named by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon as a United Nations Special Envoy on Global Education. The position is unpaid.\n\nIn December 2015, Brown took his first large-scale role in the private sector since standing down as prime minister in 2010, becoming an advisor to PIMCO. Any money earned from the role is to go to the Gordon and Sarah Brown Foundation to support charitable work.\n\nBrown's early girlfriends included the journalist Sheena McDonald and Princess Margarita, the eldest daughter of exiled King Michael of Romania. At the age of 49, Brown married Sarah Macaulay in a private ceremony at his home in North Queensferry, Fife, on 3 August 2000. On 28 December 2001 a daughter, Jennifer Jane, was born prematurely and died on 7 January 2002 one day after suffering a brain haemorrhage. They have two sons, John Macaulay (born 17 October 2003) and (James) Fraser (born on 18 July 2006). In November 2006, Fraser was diagnosed with cystic fibrosis. \"The Sun\" had learned of the situation in 2006 and published the story. In 2011 Brown stated he had wanted the details of his son's condition kept private and that the publication had left him \"in tears\". The \"Sun\" said they approached Brown and that discussion occurred with his colleagues who provided quotes to use in the article.\n\nSarah Brown rarely makes official appearances either with or without her husband. She is patron of several charities and has written articles for national newspapers related to this. At the 2008 Labour Party Conference, Sarah caused surprise by taking to the stage to introduce her husband for his keynote address. Since then her public profile has increased.\n\nBrown has two brothers, John Brown and Andrew Brown. Andrew has been Head of Media Relations in the UK for the French-owned utility company EDF Energy since 2004. Brown is also the brother-in-law of environmental journalist Clare Rewcastle Brown. Brown wrote a piece for \"The Independent\" supporting Clare's current environmental efforts on behalf of Sarawak.\n\nWhilst Prime Minister, Brown spent some of his spare time at Chequers, the house often being filled with friends. The Browns have entertained local dignitaries like Sir Leonard Figg. Brown is also a friend of Harry Potter author J. K. Rowling, who says of Brown \"I know him as affable, funny and gregarious, a great listener, a kind and loyal friend.\"\n\nThe son of a Church of Scotland minister, Brown has talked about what he calls his \"moral compass\" and of his parents being his \"inspiration\". He has, at least ostensibly, been keen to keep his religion a private matter. According to \"The Guardian\", he is a member of the Church of Scotland.\n\nOn 24 July 2008, Brown spoke at the \"Walk of Witness\" in support of poverty reduction worldwide during the Lambeth Conference. He called the march \"one of the greatest demonstrations of faith this great city has ever seen.\" Brown said that \"at our current rates of progress,\" the MDGs will not be met by the 2015 deadline. He told the Anglican Communion bishops, \"I say to you that the poor of the world have been patient but 100 years is too long for people to wait for justice and that is why we must act now.\" The full speech can be read at Gordon Brown Speech to the Walk for Witness Rally 24 July 2008.\n\n\n\nIn March 2009 Brown was named World Statesman of the Year by the Appeal of Conscience Foundation, an American organisation 'dedicated to promoting peace, human rights and understanding between religious faiths'. The award was presented by Rabbi Arthur Schneier who praised Brown's \"compassionate leadership in dealing with the challenging issues facing humanity, his commitment to freedom, human dignity and the environment, and for the major role he has played in helping to stabilise the world's financial system\".\n\n\n\n\nSpeeches\n", "id": "13076", "title": "Gordon Brown"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13077", "text": "Galileo (spacecraft)\n\nGalileo was an American unmanned spacecraft that studied the planet Jupiter and its moons, as well as several other Solar System bodies. Named after the astronomer Galileo Galilei, it consisted of an orbiter and entry probe. It was launched on October 18, 1989, carried by , on the STS-34 mission. \"Galileo\" arrived at Jupiter on December 7, 1995, after gravitational assist flybys of Venus and Earth, and became the first spacecraft to orbit Jupiter. It launched the first probe into Jupiter, directly measuring its atmosphere. Despite suffering major antenna problems, \"Galileo\" achieved the first asteroid flyby, of 951 Gaspra, and discovered the first asteroid moon, Dactyl, around 243 Ida. In 1994, \"Galileo\" observed Comet Shoemaker–Levy 9's collision with Jupiter.\n\nJupiter's atmospheric composition and ammonia clouds were recorded, the clouds possibly created by outflows from the lower depths of the atmosphere. Io's volcanism and plasma interactions with Jupiter's atmosphere were also recorded. The data \"Galileo\" collected supported the theory of a liquid ocean under the icy surface of Europa, and there were indications of similar liquid-saltwater layers under the surfaces of Ganymede and Callisto. Ganymede was shown to possess a magnetic field and the spacecraft found new evidence for exospheres around Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto. \"Galileo\" also discovered that Jupiter's faint ring system consists of dust from impacts on the four small inner moons. The extent and structure of Jupiter's magnetosphere was also mapped.\n\nOn September 21, 2003, after 14 years in space and 8 years in the Jovian system, \"Galileo\" mission was terminated by sending it into Jupiter's atmosphere at a speed of over , eliminating the possibility of contaminating local moons with terrestrial bacteria.\n\nJupiter was rated as the number one priority in the Planetary Science Decadal Survey published in the summer of 1968. In the early 1970s the first flybys of Jupiter were achieved by \"Pioneer 10\" and \"Pioneer 11\", and before the decade was out it was also visited by the more advanced \"Voyager 1\" and \"Voyager 2\" spacecraft.\n\nWork on the spacecraft began at Jet Propulsion Laboratory in 1977, while the \"Voyager 1\" and \"2\" missions were still being prepared for launch. Early plans called for a launch on on what was then codenamed STS-23 in January 1982, but delays in the development of the Space Shuttle allowed more time for development of the probe. As the shuttle program got underway, \"Galileo\" was scheduled for launch in 1984, but this later slipped to 1985 and then to 1986. The mission was initially called the \"Jupiter Orbiter Probe\"; it was christened \"Galileo\" in 1978.\n\nOnce the spacecraft was complete, its launch was scheduled for STS-61-G on-board in 1986. The Inertial Upper Stage booster was going to be used at first, but this changed to the Centaur booster, then back to IUS after \"Challenger\".\n\nThe Centaur-G liquid hydrogen-fueled booster stage allowed a direct trajectory to Jupiter. However, the mission was further delayed by the hiatus in launches that occurred after the Space Shuttle \"Challenger\" disaster. New safety protocols introduced as a result of the disaster prohibited the use of the Centaur-G stage on the Shuttle, forcing \"Galileo\" to use a lower-powered Inertial Upper Stage solid-fuel booster. The mission was re-profiled in 1987 to use several gravitational slingshots, referred to as the Venus-Earth-Earth Gravity Assist or VEEGA maneuvers, to provide the additional velocity required to reach its destination. It was finally launched on October 18, 1989, by on the STS-34 mission.\n\nVenus was flown by at 05:58:48 UTC on February 10, 1990, at a range of . Having gained in speed, the spacecraft flew by Earth twice, the first time at a range of at 20:34:34 UTC on December 8, 1990, before approaching the S-type asteroid 951 Gaspra to a distance of at 22:37 UTC on October 29, 1991. \"Galileo\" then performed a second flyby of Earth at at 15:09:25 UTC on December 8, 1992, adding to its cumulative speed. \"Galileo\" performed close observations of a second asteroid, 243 Ida, at 16:51:59 UTC on August 28, 1993, at a range of . The spacecraft discovered Ida has a moon, Dactyl, the first discovery of a natural satellite orbiting an asteroid. In 1994, \"Galileo\" was perfectly positioned to watch the fragments of Comet Shoemaker–Levy 9 crash into Jupiter, whereas terrestrial telescopes had to wait to see the impact sites as they rotated into view. After releasing its atmospheric probe on July 13, 1995, the \"Galileo\" orbiter became the first man-made satellite of Jupiter at 01:16 UTC on December 8, 1995, after it fired its main engine to enter a 198-day parking orbit.\n\n\"Galileo\" prime mission was a two-year study of the Jovian system. The spacecraft traveled around Jupiter in elongated ellipses, each orbit lasting about two months. The differing distances from Jupiter afforded by these orbits allowed \"Galileo\" to sample different parts of the planet's extensive magnetosphere. The orbits were designed for close-up flybys of Jupiter's largest moons. Once the prime mission concluded, an extended mission started on December 7, 1997; the spacecraft made a number of flybys of Europa and Io. The closest approach was on October 15, 2001. The radiation environment near Io was very unhealthy for \"Galileo\" systems, and so these flybys were saved for the extended mission when loss of the spacecraft would be more acceptable.\n\n\"Galileo\" cameras were deactivated on January 17, 2002, after they had sustained irreparable radiation damage. NASA engineers were able to recover the damaged tape recorder electronics, and \"Galileo\" continued to return scientific data until it was deorbited in 2003, performing one last scientific experiment: a measurement of the moon Amalthea's mass as the spacecraft swung by it.\n\nOn December 11, 2013, NASA reported, based on results from the \"Galileo\" mission, the detection of \"clay-like minerals\" (specifically, phyllosilicates), often associated with organic materials, on the icy crust of Europa. The presence of the minerals may have been the result of a collision with an asteroid or comet, according to the scientists.\n\nThe Jet Propulsion Laboratory built the \"Galileo\" spacecraft and managed the \"Galileo\" mission for NASA. West Germany Messerschmitt-Bölkow-Blohm supplied the propulsion module. NASA's Ames Research Center managed the atmospheric probe, which was built by Hughes Aircraft Company.\n\nAt launch, the orbiter and probe together had a mass of and stood tall. One section of the spacecraft rotated at three rpm, keeping \"Galileo\" stable and holding six instruments that gathered data from many different directions, including the fields and particles instruments. The other section of the spacecraft was an antenna, and data were periodically transmitted to it. Back on the ground, the mission operations team used software containing 650,000 lines of programming code in the orbit sequence design process; 1,615,000 lines in the telemetry interpretation; and 550,000 lines of code in navigation.\n\nThe CDH subsystem was actively redundant, with two parallel data system buses running at all times. Each data system bus (a.k.a. string) was composed of the same functional elements, consisting of multiplexers (MUX), high-level modules (HLM), low-level modules (LLM), power converters (PC), bulk memory (BUM), data management subsystem bulk memory (DBUM), timing chains (TC), phase locked loops (PLL), Golay coders (GC), hardware command decoders (HCD) and critical controllers (CRC).\n\nThe CDH subsystem was responsible for maintaining the following functions:\n\nThe spacecraft was controlled by six RCA 1802 COSMAC microprocessor CPUs: four on the spun side and two on the despun side. Each CPU was clocked at about 1.6 MHz, and fabricated on sapphire (silicon on sapphire), which is a radiation-and static-hardened material ideal for spacecraft operation. This microprocessor was the first low-power CMOS processor chip, quite on a par with the 8-bit 6502 that was being built into the Apple II desktop computer at that time.\n\nThe Galileo Attitude and Articulation Control System (AACSE) was controlled by two Itek Advanced Technology Airborne Computers (ATAC), built using radiation-hardened 2901s. The AACSE could be reprogrammed in flight by sending the new program through the Command and Data Subsystem. \"Galileo\" attitude control system software was written in the HAL/S programming language, also used in the Space Shuttle program.\n\nMemory capacity provided by each BUM was 16K of RAM, while the DBUMs each provided 8K of RAM. There were two BUMs and two DBUMs in the CDH subsystem and they all resided on the spun side of the spacecraft. The BUMs and DBUMs provided storage for sequences and contain various buffers for telemetry data and interbus communication.\n\nEvery HLM and LLM was built up around a single 1802 microprocessor and 32K of RAM (for HLMs) or 16K of RAM (for LLMs). Two HLMs and two LLMs resided on the spun side while two LLMs were on the despun side.\n\nThus, total memory capacity available to the CDH subsystem was 176K of RAM: 144K allocated to the spun side and 32K to the despun side.\n\nEach HLM was responsible for the following functions:\n\nEach LLM was responsible for the following functions:\n\nThe HCD received command data from the modulation/demodulation subsystem, decoded these data and transferred them to the HLMs and CRCs.\n\nThe CRC controlled the configuration of CDH subsystem elements. It also controlled access to the two data system buses by other spacecraft subsystems. In addition, the CRC supplied signals to enable certain critical events (e.g. probe separation).\n\nThe GCs provided Golay encoding of data via hardware.\n\nThe TCs and PLLs established timing within the CDH subsystem.\n\nThe propulsion subsystem consisted of a 400 N main engine and twelve 10 N thrusters, together with propellant, storage and pressurizing tanks and associated plumbing. The 10 N thrusters were mounted in groups of six on two 2-meter booms. The fuel for the system was of monomethylhydrazine and nitrogen tetroxide. Two separate tanks held another of helium pressurant. The propulsion subsystem was developed and built by Messerschmitt-Bölkow-Blohm and provided by West Germany, the major international partner in Project \"Galileo\".\n\nAt the time, solar panels were not practical at Jupiter's distance from the Sun; the spacecraft would have needed a minimum of of panels. Chemical batteries would likewise be prohibitively large due to technological limitations. The solution was two radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs) which powered the spacecraft through the radioactive decay of plutonium-238. The heat emitted by this decay was converted into electricity through the solid-state Seebeck effect. This provided a reliable and long-lasting source of electricity unaffected by the cold environment and high-radiation fields in the Jovian system.\n\nEach GPHS-RTG, mounted on a boom, carried of . Each RTG contained 18 separate heat source modules, and each module encased four pellets of plutonium(IV) oxide, a ceramic material resistant to fracturing. The modules were designed to survive a range of hypothetical accidents: launch vehicle explosion or fire, re-entry into the atmosphere followed by land or water impact, and post-impact situations. An outer covering of graphite provided protection against the structural, thermal, and eroding environments of a potential re-entry. Additional graphite components provided impact protection, while iridium cladding of the fuel cells provided post-impact containment. The RTGs produced about 570 watts at launch. The power output initially decreased at the rate of 0.6 watts per month and was 493 watts when \"Galileo\" arrived at Jupiter.\n\nAs the launch of \"Galileo\" neared, anti-nuclear groups, concerned over what they perceived as an unacceptable risk to the public's safety from \"Galileo\" RTGs, sought a court injunction prohibiting \"Galileo\" launch. RTGs had been used for years in planetary exploration without mishap: the Lincoln Experimental Satellites 8/9, launched by the U.S. Department of Defense, had 7% more plutonium on board than \"Galileo\", and the two \"Voyager\" spacecraft each carried 80% as much plutonium as \"Galileo\". However, activists remembered the messy crash of the Soviet Union's nuclear-powered Kosmos 954 satellite in Canada in 1978, and though was not nuclear-powered, the 1986 \"Challenger\" accident raised public awareness about spacecraft failures. In addition, no RTGs had ever done a non-orbital swing past the Earth at close range and high speed, as \"Galileo\" Venus-Earth-Earth Gravity Assist trajectory required it to do. This created a novel mission failure modality that might plausibly have entailed total dispersal of \"Galileo\" plutonium in the Earth's atmosphere. Scientist Carl Sagan, for example, a strong supporter of the \"Galileo\" mission, said in 1989 that \"there is nothing absurd about either side of this argument.\"\n\nAfter \"Challenger\", a study considered additional shielding but rejected it, in part because such a design significantly increased the overall risk of mission failure and only shifted the other risks around. For example, if a failure on orbit had occurred, additional shielding would have significantly increased the consequences of a ground impact.\n\nScientific instruments to measure fields and particles were mounted on the spinning section of the spacecraft, together with the main antenna, power supply, the propulsion module and most of \"Galileo\" computers and control electronics. The sixteen instruments, weighing altogether, included magnetometer sensors mounted on an boom to minimize interference from the spacecraft; a plasma instrument for detecting low-energy charged particles and a plasma-wave detector to study waves generated by the particles; a high-energy particle detector; and a detector of cosmic and Jovian dust. It also carried the Heavy Ion Counter, an engineering experiment to assess the potentially hazardous charged particle environments the spacecraft flew through, and an extreme ultraviolet detector associated with the UV spectrometer on the scan platform.\n\nThe despun section's instruments included the camera system; the near infrared mapping spectrometer to make multi-spectral images for atmospheric and moon surface chemical analysis; the ultraviolet spectrometer to study gases; and the photopolarimeter-radiometer to measure radiant and reflected energy. The camera system was designed to obtain images of Jupiter's satellites at resolutions 20 to 1,000 times better than \"Voyager\" best, because \"Galileo\" flew closer to the planet and its inner moons, and because the more modern CCD sensor in \"Galileo\" camera was more sensitive and had a broader color detection band than the vidicons of \"Voyager\".\n\nThe following information was taken directly from NASA's \"Galileo\" legacy site.\n\nThe SSI was an 800-by-800-pixel solid state camera consisting of an array of silicon sensors called a charge-coupled device (CCD). \"Galileo\" was one of the first spacecraft to be equipped with a CCD camera. The optical portion of the camera was built as a Cassegrain telescope. Light was collected by the primary mirror and directed to a smaller secondary mirror that channeled it through a hole in the center of the primary mirror and onto the CCD. The CCD sensor was shielded from radiation, a particular problem within the harsh Jovian magnetosphere. The shielding was accomplished by means of a thick layer of tantalum surrounding the CCD except where the light enters the system. An eight-position filter wheel was used to obtain images at specific wavelengths. The images were then combined electronically on Earth to produce color images. The spectral response of the SSI ranged from about 0.4 to 1.1 micrometres. The SSI weighed and consumed, on average, 15 watts of power.\n\nThe NIMS instrument was sensitive to 0.7-to-5.2-micrometre wavelength infrared light, overlapping the wavelength range of the SSI. The telescope associated with NIMS was all reflective (using only mirrors and no lenses) with an aperture of . The spectrometer of NIMS used a grating to disperse the light collected by the telescope. The dispersed spectrum of light was focused on detectors of indium, antimonide and silicon. The NIMS weighed and used 12 watts of power on average.\n\nThe Cassegrain telescope of the UVS had a aperture and collected light from the observation target. Both the UVS and EUV instruments used a ruled grating to disperse this light for spectral analysis. This light then passed through an exit slit into photomultiplier tubes that produced pulses or \"sprays\" of electrons. These electron pulses were counted, and these count numbers constituted the data that were sent to Earth. The UVS was mounted on \"Galileo\" scan platform and could be pointed to an object in inertial space. The EUV was mounted on the spun section. As \"Galileo\" rotated, EUV observed a narrow ribbon of space perpendicular to the spin axis. The two instruments combined weighed about and used 5.9 watts of power.\n\nThe PPR had seven radiometry bands. One of these used no filters and observed all incoming radiation, both solar and thermal. Another band allowed only solar radiation through. The difference between the solar-plus-thermal and the solar-only channels gave the total thermal radiation emitted. The PPR also measured in five broadband channels that spanned the spectral range from 17 to 110 micrometres. The radiometer provided data on the temperatures of Jupiter's atmosphere and satellites. The design of the instrument was based on that of an instrument flown on the \"Pioneer Venus\" spacecraft. A aperture reflecting telescope collected light and directed it to a series of filters, and, from there, measurements were performed by the detectors of the PPR. The PPR weighed and consumed about 5 watts of power.\n\nThe Dust Detector Subsystem (DDS) was used to measure the mass, electric charge, and velocity of incoming particles. The masses of dust particles that the DDS could detect go from to grams. The speed of these small particles could be measured over the range of . The instrument could measure impact rates from 1 particle per 115 days (10 megaseconds) to 100 particles per second. Such data was used to help determine dust origin and dynamics within the magnetosphere. The DDS weighed and used an average of 5.4 watts of power.\n\nThe Energetic Particles Detector (EPD) was designed to measure the numbers and energies of ions and electrons whose energies exceeded about . The EPD could also measure the direction of travel of such particles and, in the case of ions, could determine their composition (whether the ion is oxygen or sulfur, for example). The EPD used silicon solid-state detectors and a time-of-flight detector system to measure changes in the energetic particle population at Jupiter as a function of position and time. These measurements helped determine how the particles got their energy and how they were transported through Jupiter's magnetosphere. The EPD weighed and used 10.1 watts of power on average.\n\nThe HIC was, in effect, a repackaged and updated version of some parts of the flight spare of the \"Voyager\" Cosmic Ray System. The HIC detected heavy ions using stacks of single crystal silicon wafers. The HIC could measure heavy ions with energies as low as and as high as per nucleon. This range included all atomic substances between carbon and nickel. The HIC and the EUV shared a communications link and, therefore, had to share observing time. The HIC weighed and used an average of 2.8 watts of power.\n\nThe magnetometer (MAG) used two sets of three sensors. The three sensors allowed the three orthogonal components of the magnetic field section to be measured. One set was located at the end of the magnetometer boom and, in that position, was about from the spin axis of the spacecraft. The second set, designed to detect stronger fields, was from the spin axis. The boom was used to remove the MAG from the immediate vicinity of \"Galileo\" to minimize magnetic effects from the spacecraft. However, not all these effects could be eliminated by distancing the instrument. The rotation of the spacecraft was used to separate natural magnetic fields from engineering-induced fields. Another source of potential error in measurement came from the bending and twisting of the long magnetometer boom. To account for these motions, a calibration coil was mounted rigidly on the spacecraft to generate a reference magnetic field during calibrations. The magnetic field at the surface of the Earth has a strength of about 50,000 nT. At Jupiter, the outboard (11 m) set of sensors could measure magnetic field strengths in the range from ±32 to ±512 nT, while the inboard (6.7 m) set was active in the range from ±512 to ±16,384 nT. The MAG experiment weighed and used 3.9 watts of power.\n\nThe PLS used seven fields of view to collect charged particles for energy and mass analysis. These fields of view covered most angles from 0 to 180 degrees, fanning out from the spin axis. The rotation of the spacecraft carried each field of view through a full circle. The PLS measured particles in the energy range from . The PLS weighed and used an average of 10.7 watts of power.\n\nAn electric dipole antenna was used to study the electric fields of plasmas, while two search coil magnetic antennas studied the magnetic fields. The electric dipole antenna was mounted at the tip of the magnetometer boom. The search coil magnetic antennas were mounted on the high-gain antenna feed. Nearly simultaneous measurements of the electric and magnetic field spectrum allowed electrostatic waves to be distinguished from electromagnetic waves. The PWS weighed and used an average of 9.8 watts.\nThe \"Galileo\" Probe was an atmospheric-entry probe carried by the main \"Galileo\" spacecraft on its way to Jupiter. It separated from the main spacecraft on July 10, 1995, five months before its rendezvous with the planet on December 7. After a rough deceleration, the Descent Module started to return data to the main spacecraft orbiting high above Jupiter. The probe was built by Hughes Aircraft Company at its El Segundo, California, plant, and measured about across. Inside the probe's heat shield, the Descent Module with its scientific instruments were protected from extreme heat and pressure during its high-speed journey into the Jovian atmosphere, entering at \n\nDuring the 57 minutes of data collecting, the \"Galileo\" Probe returned some surprising data on Jupiter's atmospheric conditions and composition and achieved some new discoveries.\n\nAfter arriving on December 8, 1995 (UTC), and completing 35 orbits around Jupiter throughout a nearly eight-year mission, the \"Galileo\" orbiter was destroyed during a controlled impact with Jupiter on September 21, 2003. During that intervening time, \"Galileo\" changed the way scientists saw Jupiter and provided a wealth of information on the moons orbiting the planet which will be studied for years to come. Culled from NASA's press kit, the top orbiter scientific results were:\n\n\nThe astronomer Carl Sagan, pondering the question of whether life on Earth could be easily detected from space, devised a set of experiments in the late 1980s using \"Galileo\" remote sensing instruments during the mission's first Earth flyby in December 1990. After data acquisition and processing, Sagan \"et al.\" published a paper in \"Nature\" in 1993 detailing the results of the experiment. \"Galileo\" had indeed found what are now referred to as the \"Sagan criteria for life\". These included strong absorption of light at the red end of the visible spectrum (especially over continents) which was caused by absorption by chlorophyll in photosynthesizing plants, absorption bands of molecular oxygen which is also a result of plant activity, infrared absorption bands caused by the ~1 micromole per mole (µmol/mol) of methane in Earth's atmosphere (a gas which must be replenished by either volcanic or biological activity), and modulated narrowband radio wave transmissions uncharacteristic of any known natural source. \"Galileo\" experiments were thus the first ever controls in the newborn science of astrobiological remote sensing.\n\nIn December 1992, during \"Galileo\" second gravity-assist planetary flyby of Earth, another groundbreaking experiment was performed. Optical communications in space was assessed by detecting light pulses from powerful lasers with \"Galileo\" CCD. The experiment, dubbed \"Galileo\" Optical Experiment or GOPEX, used two separate sites to beam laser pulses to the spacecraft, one at Table Mountain Observatory in California and the other at the Starfire Optical Range in New Mexico. The Table Mountain site used a frequency doubled Neodymium-Yttrium-Aluminium garnet () laser operating at 532 nm with a repetition rate of ~15 to 30 Hz and a pulse power (FWHM) in the tens of megawatts range, which was coupled to a Cassegrain telescope for transmission to \"Galileo\". The Starfire range site used a similar setup with a larger, , transmitting telescope. Long exposure (~0.1 to 0.8 s) images using \"Galileo\" 560 nm centered green filter produced images of Earth clearly showing the laser pulses even at distances of up to . Adverse weather conditions, restrictions placed on laser transmissions by the U.S. Space Defense Operations Center (SPADOC) and a pointing error caused by the scan platform acceleration on the spacecraft being slower than expected (which prevented laser detection on all frames with less than 400 ms exposure times) all contributed to the reduction of the number of successful detections of the laser transmission to 48 of the total 159 frames taken. Nonetheless, the experiment was considered a resounding success and the data acquired will likely be used in the future to design laser \"downlinks\" which will send large volumes of data very quickly from spacecraft to Earth. The scheme is already being studied (as of 2004) for a data link to a future Mars orbiting spacecraft.\n\n\"Galileo\" star scanner was a small optical telescope that provided an absolute attitude reference. It also made several scientific discoveries serendipitously. In the prime mission, it was found that the star scanner was able to detect high-energy particles as a noise signal. This data was eventually calibrated to show the particles were predominantly > electrons that were trapped in the Jovian magnetic belts, and released to the Planetary Data System.\n\nA second discovery occurred in 2000. The star scanner was observing a set of stars which included the second magnitude star Delta Velorum. At one point, this star dimmed for 8 hours below the star scanner's detection threshold. Subsequent analysis of \"Galileo\" data and work by amateur and professional astronomers showed that Delta Velorum is the brightest known eclipsing binary, brighter at maximum than even Algol. It has a primary period of 45 days and the dimming is just visible with the naked eye.\n\nA final discovery occurred during the last two orbits of the mission. When the spacecraft passed the orbit of Jupiter's moon Amalthea, the star scanner detected unexpected flashes of light that were reflections from moonlets. None of the individual moonlets were reliably sighted twice, hence no orbits were determined and the moonlets did not meet the International Astronomical Union requirements to receive designations. It is believed that these moonlets most likely are debris ejected from Amalthea and form a tenuous, and perhaps temporary, ring.\n\nOn October 29, 1991, two months after entering the asteroid belt, \"Galileo\" performed the first asteroid encounter by a human spacecraft, passing approximately from 951 Gaspra at a relative speed of about . Several pictures of Gaspra were taken, along with measurements using the NIMS instrument to indicate composition and physical properties. The last two images were relayed back to Earth in November 1991 and June 1992. The imagery revealed a cratered and very irregular body, measuring about . The remainder of data taken, including low-resolution images of more of the surface, were transmitted in late November 1992.\n\nOn August 28, 1993, \"Galileo\" flew within of the asteroid 243 Ida. The probe discovered that Ida had a small moon, dubbed Dactyl, measuring around in diameter; this was the first asteroid moon discovered. Measurements using \"Galileo\" Solid State Imager, Magnetometer and NIMS instrument were taken. From subsequent analysis of this data, Dactyl appears to be an SII-subtype S-type asteroid, and is spectrally different from 243 Ida. It is hypothesized that Dactyl may have been produced by partial melting within a Koronis parent body, while the 243 Ida region escaped such igneous processing.\n\nSome of the mission challenges that had to be overcome included intense radiation at Jupiter and hardware wear-and-tear, as well as dealing with the unexpected conditions of discovery.\n\nJupiter's uniquely harsh radiation environment caused over 20 anomalies over the course of \"Galileo\" mission, in addition to the incidents expanded upon below. Despite exceeding its radiation design limit by at least a factor of three, the spacecraft survived all these anomalies. Work-arounds were found eventually for all of these problems, and \"Galileo\" was never rendered entirely non-functional by Jupiter's radiation. The radiation limits for \"Galileo\" computers were based off data returned from \"Pioneers 10\" and \"11\", since much of the design work was underway before the two \"Voyagers\" arrived at Jupiter in 1979.\n\nA typical effect of the radiation was that several of the science instruments suffered increased noise while within about of Jupiter. The SSI camera began producing totally white images when the spacecraft was hit by the exceptional 'Bastille Day' coronal mass ejection in 2000, and did so again on subsequent close approaches to Jupiter. The quartz crystal used as the frequency reference for the radio suffered permanent frequency shifts with each Jupiter approach. A spin detector failed, and the spacecraft gyro output was biased by the radiation environment.\n\nThe most severe effect of the radiation were current leakages somewhere in spacecraft's power bus, most likely across brushes at a spin bearing connecting rotor and stator sections of the orbiter. These current leakages triggered a reset of the onboard computer and caused it to go into safe mode. The resets occurred when the spacecraft was either close to Jupiter or in the region of space magnetically downstream of the Earth. A change to the software was made in April 1999 that allowed the onboard computer to detect these resets and autonomously recover, so as to avoid safe mode.\n\n\"Galileo\" high-gain antenna failed to fully deploy after its first flyby of Earth. The antenna had 18 ribs, like an umbrella and when the driver motor started and put pressure on the ribs, they were supposed to pop out of the cup their tips were held in. Only 15 popped out, leaving the antenna looking like a lop-sided, half-open umbrella. Investigators concluded that during the 4.5 years that \"Galileo\" spent in storage after the 1986 \"Challenger\" disaster, the lubricants between the tips of the ribs and the cup were eroded and worn away from vibration during three cross-country journeys by truck between California and Florida for the spacecraft. The failed ribs were those closest to the flat-bed trailers carrying \"Galileo\" on these trips, which were used instead of air transport to cut costs. The antenna lubricants were not checked or replaced before launch.\n\nTo fix this malfunction, engineers tried thermal-cycling the antenna, rotating the spacecraft up to its maximum spin rate of 10.5 rpm, and \"hammering\" the antenna deployment motor—turning it on and off repeatedly—over 13,000 times. However, all attempts failed to open the high-gain antenna.\n\nThe associated problem mission managers faced was if one rib popped free, there would be increased pressure on the remaining two, and if one of them popped out the last would be under so much pressure it would never release. The second part of the problem was due to \"Galileo\" revised flight plan. The probe had never been intended to approach the Sun any closer than the orbit of Earth, but sending it to Venus would expose it to temperatures at least 50 degrees higher than at Earth distance. So the probe had to be protected from that extra heat, part of which involved adapting some of the computer functions. Forty-one drivers had been programmed into the computer, but with no room for any more, the mission planners had to decide which driver they could use in association with the heat protection. They chose the antenna motor reverse driver.\n\nEven with the dry grease at the antenna rib tips, had the antenna motor been able to run backwards, as well as forwards, the ribs would have eventually popped out.\n\nFortunately, \"Galileo\" possessed an additional low-gain antenna that was capable of transmitting information back to Earth, although since it transmitted a signal isotropically, the low-gain antenna's bandwidth was significantly less than what the high-gain antenna's would have been; the high-gain antenna was to have transmitted at 134 kilobits per second, whereas the low-gain antenna was only intended to transmit at about 8 to 16 bits per second. \"Galileo\" low-gain antenna transmitted with a power of about 15 to 20 watts, which, by the time it reached Earth and had been collected by one of the large aperture (70 m) NASA Deep Space Network antennas, had a total power of about −170 dBm or 10 zeptowatts ( watts). Through the implementation of sophisticated technologies, the arraying of several Deep Space Network antennas and sensitivity upgrades to the receivers used to listen to \"Galileo\" signal, data throughput was increased to a maximum of 160 bits per second. By further using data compression, the effective data rate could be raised to 1,000 bits per second. The data collected on Jupiter and its moons was stored in the spacecraft's onboard tape recorder, and transmitted back to Earth during the long apoapsis portion of the probe's orbit using the low-gain antenna. At the same time, measurements were made of Jupiter's magnetosphere and transmitted back to Earth. The reduction in available bandwidth reduced the total amount of data transmitted throughout the mission, although 70% of \"Galileo\" science goals could still be met.\n\nThe failure of \"Galileo\" high-gain antenna meant that data storage to the tape recorder for later compression and playback was absolutely crucial in order to obtain any substantial information from the flybys of Jupiter and its moons. In October 1995, \"Galileo\" four-track, 114-megabyte digital tape recorder, which was manufactured by Odetics Corporation, remained stuck in rewind mode for 15 hours before engineers learned what had happened and sent commands to shut it off. Though the recorder itself was still in working order, the malfunction possibly damaged a length of tape at the end of the reel. This section of tape was subsequently declared \"off limits\" to any future data recording, and was covered with 25 more turns of tape to secure the section and reduce any further stresses, which could tear it. Because it happened only weeks before \"Galileo\" entered orbit around Jupiter, the anomaly prompted engineers to sacrifice data acquisition of almost all of the Io and Europa observations during the orbit insertion phase, in order to focus solely on recording data sent from the Jupiter probe descent.\n\nIn November 2002, after the completion of the mission's only encounter with Jupiter's moon Amalthea, problems with playback of the tape recorder again plagued \"Galileo\". About 10 minutes after the closest approach of the Amalthea flyby, \"Galileo\" stopped collecting data, shut down all of its instruments, and went into safe mode, apparently as a result of exposure to Jupiter's intense radiation environment. Though most of the Amalthea data was already written to tape, it was found that the recorder refused to respond to commands telling it to play back data. After weeks of troubleshooting of an identical flight spare of the recorder on the ground, it was determined that the cause of the malfunction was a reduction of light output in three infrared Optek OP133 light-emitting diodes located in the drive electronics of the recorder's motor encoder wheel. The GaAs LEDs had been particularly sensitive to proton-irradiation-induced atomic lattice displacement defects, which greatly decreased their effective light output and caused the drive motor's electronics to falsely believe the motor encoder wheel was incorrectly positioned. \"Galileo\" flight team then began a series of \"annealing\" sessions, where current was passed through the LEDs for hours at a time to heat them to a point where some of the crystalline lattice defects would be shifted back into place, thus increasing the LED's light output. After about 100 hours of annealing and playback cycles, the recorder was able to operate for up to an hour at a time. After many subsequent playback and cooling cycles, the complete transmission back to Earth of all recorded Amalthea flyby data was successful.\n\nThe atmospheric probe deployed its parachute fifty-three seconds later than anticipated, resulting in a small loss of upper atmospheric readings. This was attributed to wiring problems with an accelerometer that determined when to begin the parachute deployment sequence.\n\nTwo years of Jupiter's intense radiation took its toll on the spacecraft's systems, and its fuel supply was running low in the early 2000s. \"Galileo\" had not been sterilized prior to launch and could have carried bacteria from Earth. Therefore, a plan was formulated to send the probe directly into Jupiter, in an intentional crash to eliminate the possibility of any impact with Jupiter's moons and prevent a forward contamination.\n\n\"Galileo\" flew by Amalthea on November 5, 2002, during its 34th orbit, allowing a measurement of the moon's mass as it passed within of its surface. On April 14, 2003, \"Galileo\" reached its greatest distance from Jupiter for the entire mission since orbital insertion, , before plunging back towards the gas giant for its final impact. At the completion of its 35th and final circuit around the Jovian system, \"Galileo\" impacted the gas giant in darkness just south of the equator on September 21, 2003, at 18:57 UTC. Its impact speed was approximately . The total mission cost was about .\n\nWhile \"Galileo\" was operating, \"Cassini–Huygens\" coasted by the planet in 2000 en route to Saturn, and it also collected data on Jupiter. \"Ulysses\" passed by Jupiter in 1992 and 2004 on its mission to study Sun's polar regions. \"New Horizons\" also passed close by Jupiter in 2007 for a gravity assist en route to Pluto, and it too collected data on the planet. The next mission to orbit Jupiter would be the \"Juno\" spacecraft in July 2016.\n\nNASA's \"Juno\" spacecraft, launched in 2011 and planned for a two-year tour of the Jovian system, successfully completed Jupiter orbital insertion on July 4, 2016.\n\nThere was a spare \"Galileo\" spacecraft that the Europeans considered using for a mission to Saturn; however, this was passed over in favor of a newer design which became \"Cassini–Huygens\". Even before \"Galileo\" concluded, NASA considered the Europa Orbiter, which was a mission to Jupiter's moon Europa, but it was canceled in 2002.\n\nESA also is planning to return to the Jovian system with the Jupiter Icy Moons Explorer (JUICE), which is designed to orbit Ganymede in the 2020s. There have been several other attempts at missions that were dedicated to, or included, the Jupiter system as part of their mission plan but did not make it out of the planning stages.\n\nFollowing the cancellation of Europa Orbiter, lower-cost versions called Europa Clipper were studied. These studies led to the Europa Multiple-Flyby Mission, which was approved in 2015 and is currently planned for launch in the mid-2020s.\n\nInvestigators and researchers came from the following institutions, and included famous scientists such as Carl Sagan and James Van Allen.\n\n\nBuilders:\n\nCrew of STS-34:\n\n\n", "id": "13077", "title": "Galileo (spacecraft)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13078", "text": "Garden of Eden\n\nThe Garden of Eden (Hebrew גַּן עֵדֶן, \"Gan ʿEḏen\") or often Paradise is the biblical \"garden of God\", described most notably in the Book of Genesis chapters 2 and 3, and also in the Book of Ezekiel. The \"garden of God\", not called \"Eden\", is mentioned in Genesis 13, and the \"trees of the garden\" are mentioned in Ezekiel 31. The Book of Zechariah and the Book of Psalms also refer to trees and water in relation to the temple without explicitly mentioning Eden.\n\nTraditionally, the favored derivation of the name \"Eden\" was from the Akkadian \"edinnu\", derived from a Sumerian word meaning \"plain\" or \"steppe\". \"Eden\" is now believed to be more closely related to an Aramaic root word meaning \"fruitful, well-watered.\" The Hebrew term is translated \"pleasure\" in Sarah's secret saying in .\n\nMuch like records of the great flood, creation story and confusion of languages, the story of Eden echoes the Mesopotamian myth of a king, as a primordial man, who is placed in a \"divine garden\" to guard the tree of life. In the Hebrew Bible, Adam and Eve are depicted as walking around the Garden of Eden naked due to their innocence. Eden and its rivers may signify the real Jerusalem, the Temple of Solomon, or the Promised Land. It may also represent the divine garden on Zion, and the mountain of God, which was also Jerusalem. The imagery of the Garden, with its serpent and cherubs, has been compared to the images of the Solomonic Temple with its copper serpent (the nehushtan) and guardian cherubs.\n\nThe second part of the Genesis creation narrative, , opens with Adonai Elohim (the God, lit. YHWH Elohim, see Names of God in Judaism) creating the first man (Adam), whom he placed in a garden that he planted \"eastward in Eden\".\nThe man was free to eat from any tree in the garden except the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. Last of all, the God made a woman (Eve) from a rib of the man to be a companion the man. In chapter three, the man and the woman were seduced by the serpent into eating the forbidden fruit, and they were expelled from the garden to prevent them from eating of the tree of life, and thus living forever. Cherubim were placed east of the garden, \"and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep him away from the tree of life\". (Gen.3:24)\n\nIn the prophet Ezekiel the \"son of man\" sets down God's word against the king of Tyre: the king was the \"seal of perfection\", adorned with precious stones from the day of his creation, placed by God in the garden of Eden on the holy mountain as a guardian cherub. But the king sinned through wickedness and violence, and so he was driven out of the garden and thrown to the earth, where now he is consumed by God's fire: \"All the nations who knew you are appalled at you, you have come to a horrible end and will be no more.\" (v.19)\n\nAccording to Terje Stordalen, the Eden in Ezekiel appears to be located in Lebanon. \"[I]t appears that the Lebanon is an alternative placement in Phoenician myth (as in Ez 28,13, III.48) of the Garden of Eden\", and there are connections between paradise, the garden of Eden and the forests of Lebanon (possibly used symbolically) within prophetic writings. Edward Lipinski and Peter Kyle McCarter have suggested that the Garden of the gods (Sumerian paradise), the oldest Sumerian version of the Garden of Eden, relates to a mountain sanctuary in the Lebanon and Anti-Lebanon ranges.\n\nAlthough the Garden of Eden is considered to be mythological by most scholars, there have been other suggestions for its location: for example, at the head of the Persian Gulf, in southern Mesopotamia (now Iraq) where the Tigris and Euphrates rivers run into the sea; in Iranian Azerbaijan, and in the vicinity of Tabriz;, and in the Armenian Highlands or Armenian Plateau.\n\nAccording to the Bible, the location of Eden is described in the Book of Genesis, chapter 2, verse 10-14:\n\n\nIn the Talmud and the Jewish Kabbalah, the scholars agree that there are two types of spiritual places called \"Garden in Eden\". The first is rather terrestrial, of abundant fertility and luxuriant vegetation, known as the \"lower Gan Eden\". The second is envisioned as being celestial, the habitation of righteous, Jewish and non-Jewish, immortal souls, known as the \"higher Gan Eden\". The Rabbanim differentiate between \"Gan\" and Eden. Adam is said to have dwelt only in the \"Gan\", whereas Eden is said never to be witnessed by any mortal eye.\n\nAccording to Jewish eschatology, the higher Gan Eden is called the \"Garden of Righteousness\". It has been created since the beginning of the world, and will appear gloriously at the end of time. The righteous dwelling there will enjoy the sight of the heavenly \"chayot\" carrying the throne of God. Each of the righteous will walk with God, who will lead them in a dance. Its Jewish and non-Jewish inhabitants are \"clothed with garments of light and eternal life, and eat of the tree of life\" (Enoch 58,3) near to God and His anointed ones. This Jewish rabbinical concept of a higher Gan Eden is opposed by the Hebrew terms \"gehinnom\" and \"sheol\", figurative names for the place of spiritual purification for the wicked dead in Judaism, a place envisioned as being at the greatest possible distance from heaven.\n\nIn modern Jewish eschatology it is believed that history will complete itself and the ultimate destination will be when all mankind returns to the Garden of Eden.\n\nEvents taking place in the Garden of Eden are spoken about prominently in the Quran and the tafsir (interpretation). The term \"Jannāt `Adni\" (\"Gardens of Eden\" or \"Gardens of Perpetual Residence\") is used in the Qur'an for the destination of the righteous. There are several mentions of \"the Garden\" in the Qur'an (2:35, 7:19, 20:117), meaning the Garden of Eden, but without the word \"`Adn\". There are other places that talk about events there, without mentioning the location. This includes surat Sad, which features 18 verses on the subject (38:71-88), surat al-Baqarah, surat al-A'raf, and surat al-Hijr. The narrative mainly surrounds the resulting expulsion of Iblis from the garden and his subsequent tempting of Adam and Eve. After Iblis refuses to follow God's command to bow down to Adam for being his greatest creation, Allah transforms him into Satan as a punishment. Despite the Biblical account, the Quran mentions only one tree in Eden, the tree of immortality, which Allah specifically claimed it was forbidden to Adam and Eve. Despite this, however, Satan, disguised as a serpent, repeatedly told Adam to eat from the tree, and eventually both Adam and Eve did so, resulting in disobeying Allah. These stories are also featured in the Islamic hadith collections, including al-Tabari.\n\nMembers of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (also known as Mormons or Latter-day Saints) believe that after Adam and Eve were expelled from the Garden of Eden they resided in a place known as Adam-ondi-Ahman, located in present-day Daviess County, Missouri. It is recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants that Adam blessed his posterity there and that he will return to that place at the time of the final judgement in fulfillment of biblical prophecy.\n\nNumerous early leaders of the Church, including Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and George Q. Cannon, taught that the Garden of Eden itself was located in nearby Jackson County, Missouri, but there are no surviving first-hand accounts of that doctrine being taught by Joseph Smith himself. LDS doctrine is unclear as to the exact location of the Garden of Eden, but tradition among Latter-Day Saints places it somewhere in the vicinity of Adam-ondi-Ahman, or in Jackson County.\n\nGarden of Eden motifs most frequently portrayed in illuminated manuscripts and paintings are the \"Sleep of Adam\" (\"Creation of Eve\"), the \"Temptation of Eve\" by the Serpent, the \"Fall of Man\" where Adam takes the fruit, and the \"Expulsion\". The idyll of \"Naming Day in Eden\" was less often depicted. Much of Milton's \"Paradise Lost\" occurs in the Garden of Eden. Michelangelo depicted a at the Garden of Eden in the Sistine Chapel ceiling. In \"the Divine Comedy,\" Dante places the Garden at the top of Mt. Purgatory. For many medieval writers, the image of the Garden of Eden also creates a location for human love and sexuality, often associated with the classic and medieval trope of the locus amoenus. One of oldest depictions of Garden of Eden is made in Byzantine style in Ravenna, while the city was still under Byzantine control. A preserved blue mosaic is part of the mausoleum of Galla Placidia. Circular motifs represent flowers of the garden of Eden.\n\n\n", "id": "13078", "title": "Garden of Eden"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13079", "text": "Glottis\n\nThe glottis is defined as the opening between the vocal folds (the rima glottidis).\n\nAs the vocal folds vibrate, the resulting vibration produces a \"buzzing\" quality to the speech, called voice or voicing or pronunciation.\n\nSound production that involves moving the vocal folds close together is called \"glottal\". English has a voiceless glottal transition spelled \"h\". This sound is produced by keeping the vocal folds spread somewhat, resulting in turbulent airflow through the glottis. In many accents of English the glottal stop (made by pressing the folds together) is used as a variant allophone of the phoneme (and in some dialects, occasionally of and ); in some languages, this sound is a phoneme of its own.\n\nSkilled players of the Australian didgeridoo restrict their glottal opening in order to produce the full range of timbres available on the instrument.\n\nThe vibration produced is an essential component of \"voiced\" consonants as well as vowels. If the vocal folds are drawn apart, air flows between them causing no vibration, as in the production of voiceless consonants.\n\nThe glottis is also important in the valsalva maneuver.\n\n", "id": "13079", "title": "Glottis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13080", "text": "Gurmukhi alphabet\n\nGurmukhi () (Gurmukhi: ਗੁਰਮੁਖੀ) is one of three scripts for writing the Punjabi language. Gurumukhi was modified, standardized and used by Guru Angad (1563–1606), the second Sikh Guru, which gives it the name \"Gurmukhi\" or \"from the Guru's mouth\". It is a Sikh script particularly used for Sikhism and in official documents in parts of India and elsewhere, while Muslim Punjabis in Pakistan use the Persian script, and Hindu Punjabis in India use the Gurmukhi or Nāgarī script.\n\nThe primary religious scripture of Sikhism, Guru Granth Sahib is written in the Gurmukhī alphabet, in various dialects – including Lahnda (Western Punjabi), Braj Bhasha, Khariboli, Sanskrit, Sindhi and Persian – often coalesced under the generic title of Sant Bhasha.\n\nModern Gurmukhī has thirty-eight consonants (\"akhar\"), 10 vowel symbols (\"lāga mātrā\"), two symbols for nasal sounds (\"pair bindi\" and \"ṭippī\"), and one symbol which duplicates the sound of any consonant (\"addak\"). In addition, four conjuncts are used: three subjoined forms of the consonants Rara, Haha and Vava, and one half-form of Yayya. Use of the conjunct forms of Vava and Yayya is increasingly scarce in modern contexts.\n\nThe Gurmukhi script has roots in the Brahmi script like many north Indian languages. Though it appears quite different from other Indic scripts, a closer examination reveals it is very similar to other Indo-Aryan scripts such as the Devanagari, except for pronounced angles and structural emphasis.\n\nGurmukhi is one of many Indic scripts that evolved from the ancient Brahmi script.\n\nNotable features:\n\nThere are two major theories on how the \"Proto-Gurmukhī script\" emerged in the 15th century. G.B. Singh (1950), while quoting al-Biruni's \"Ta'rikh al-Hind\" (1030 CE), says that the script evolved from Ardhanagari. Al-Biruni writes that the Ardhanagari script was used in Bathinda and western parts of the Punjab in the 10th century. For some time, Bathinda remained the capital of the kingdom of Bhati Rajputs of the Pal clan, who ruled North India before the Muslims occupied the country. According to al-Biruni, Ardhanagari was a mixture of devanagari used in Ujjain and Malwa and \"Siddha Matrika\" or the last stage of Siddhaṃ script, a variant of the Śāradā script used in Kashmir. This theory is confusing as Gurmukhī characters have a very close resemblance with \"Siddh Matrika\" inscriptions found at some sacred wells in Punjab as G.B Singh notes, one being the hathur inscription dating to just before the brith of Guru Nanak. Siddh Matrika seems to have been the prevalent script for devotional writings in Punjab right up to the founding of Sikhism, after which its successor Gurmukhī appears.\n\nPritam Singh (1992) has also traced the origins of Gurmukhī to the \"Siddha Matrika\". \"Siddha Matrika\" along with its sister Takri alphabet has its origins in the Śāradā script of Kashmir.\n\nTarlochan Singh Bedi (1999) writes that the Gurmukhī script developed in the 10-14th centuries from the \"Devasesha\" stage of the Śāradā script, the intermediate phase being Siddha Matrika, before the final evolution into Gurmukhī. His argument is that from the 10th century, regional differences started to appear between the Śāradā script used in Punjab, the Hill States (partly Himachal Pradesh) and Kashmir. The regional Śāradā script evolved from this stage until the 14th century, when it starts to appear in the form of Gurmukhī. Indian epigraphists call this stage \"Devasesha\", while Bedi prefers the name \"Pritham Gurmukhī\" or Proto-Gurmukhī.\n\nThe Sikh gurus adopted proto-Gurmukhī to write the Guru Granth Sahib, the religious scriptures of the Sikhs. Other contemporary scripts used in the Punjab were Takri and the Laṇḍā scripts. The Takri alphabet developed through the \"Devasesha\" stage of the Śāradā script and is found mainly in the Hill States such as Chamba, Himachal Pradesh, where it is called \"Chambyali\", and in Jammu Division, where it is known as \"Dogri\". The local Takri variants got the status of official scripts in some of the Punjab Hill States, and were used for both administrative and literary purposes until the 19th century. After 1948, when Himachal Pradesh was established as an administrative unit, the local \"Takri\" variants were replaced by Devanagari.\n\nMeanwhile, the mercantile scripts of Punjab known as the Laṇḍā scripts were normally not used for literary purposes. \"Landa\" means alphabet \"without tail\", implying that the script did not have vowel symbols. In Punjab, there were at least ten different scripts classified as Laṇḍā, Mahajani being the most popular. The Laṇḍā scripts were used for household and trade purposes. Compared to the Laṇḍā, Sikh Gurus favoured the use of \"Proto-Gurmukhī\", because of the difficulties involved in pronouncing words without vowel signs.\n\nThe usage of Gurmukhī letters in Guru Granth Sahib meant that the script developed its own orthographical rules. In the following epochs, Gurmukhī became the prime script applied for literary writings of the Sikhs. Later in the 20th century, the script was given the authority as the official script of the Punjab, India while in the Punjab, Pakistan the Persianate Shahmukhi alphabet is still in use.\n\nAlthough the word \"Gurmukhī\" has been commonly translated as \"from the Mouth of the Guru,\" the term used for the Punjabi script has somewhat different connotations. The opinion traditional scholars for this is that as the Sikh holy writings, before they were written down, were uttered by the Gurus, they came to be known as Gurmukhī or the \"\"Utterance\" of the Guru\". Consequently, the script that was used for scribing the \"utterance\" was also given the same name. The term that would mean \"by the Guru's mouth\" would be \"Gurmū̃hī̃,\" which sounds considerably different but looks similar in Latin script.\n\nHowever, the prevalent view among Punjabi linguists is that as in the early stages the Gurmukhī letters were primarily used by \"Gurmukhs\" (literally, \"those who follow or face the Guru\"), the script came to be associated with them. Another view is that as the \"Gurmukhs\", in accordance with the Sikh belief, used to meditate on the letters ਵ, ਹ, ਗ, ਰ which jointly form ਵਾਹਿਗੁਰੂ or Praise of Guru in Sikhism, these letters were called \"Gurmukhī\", or \"of the Gurmukhs\". Later, the whole script came to be known as Gurmukhī.\n\nThe Gurmukhī alphabet contains thirty-five letters. The first three are distinct because they form the basis for vowels and are not consonants, and except for \"æṛa\" are never used on their own. See the section on vowels for further details.\n\nਙ |ŋɑŋːɑ̃ | and ਞ |ɲəɲːɑ̃ | are rarely used. They cannot begin a syllable or be placed between two consonants, and occur most often as an allophone of before specific consonant phonemes.\n\nThe pronunciation of ਵ will vary between and depending on the word.\n\n\nIn addition to these, there are six consonants created by placing a dot (\"bindi\") at the foot (\"pair\") of the consonant (these are not present in Sri Guru Granth Sahib). These are used most often for loanwords, though not exclusively:\n\nThree \"subscript\" letters are utilised in Gurmukhī: forms of ਹ(h), ਰ(r), and ਵ(v). ਰ(r) and ਵ(v) are used to make consonant clusters and behave similarly; subjoined ਹ(h) raises tone.\n\n\nGurmukhī is similar to Brahmi scripts in that all consonants are followed by an inherent 'a' sound (unless at the end of a word when the 'a' is usually dropped). This inherent vowel sound can be changed by using dependent vowel signs which attach to a bearing consonant. In some cases, dependent vowel signs cannot be used – at the beginning of a word or syllable for instance – and so an independent vowel character is used instead.\n\nIndependent vowels are constructed using three bearer characters: Ura (ੳ), Aira (ਅ) and Iri (ੲ). With the exception of Aira (which represents the vowel 'a') they are never used without additional vowel signs.\n\nDotted circles represent the bearer consonant. Vowels are always pronounced after the consonant they are attached to. Thus, Sihari is always written to the left, but pronounced after the character on the right.\n\n\"Ṭippi\" ( ੰ ) and \"bindi\" ( ਂ ) are used for producing a nasal phoneme depending on the following obstruent or a nasal vowel at the end of a word. All short vowels use \"ṭippi\" and all long vowels are paired with \"bindi\" except for \"Dulankar\" ( ੂ ), which uses \"ṭippi\" instead. Older texts may follow other conventions.\n\n\"Bindi\" ( ਂ ) is also used for nasalisation.\n\nThe use of \"addak\" ( ੱ ) indicates that the following consonant is geminate. This means that the subsequent consonant is doubled or reinforced.\n\nThe \"halant\" (੍) character is not used when writing Punjabi in Gurmukhī. However, it may occasionally be used in Sanskritised text or in dictionaries for extra phonetic information. When it is used, it represents the suppression of the inherent vowel.\n\nThe effect of this is shown below:\n\nThe \"visarg\" symbol (ਃ U+0A03) is used very occasionally in Gurmukhī. It can either represent an abbreviation (like period is used in English) or it can act like a Sanskrit Visarga where a voiceless 'h' sound is pronounced after the vowel.\n\nThe \"udaat\" symbol (ੑ U+0A51) occurs in older texts and indicates a high tone.\n\nGurmukhī has its own set of digits, used exactly as in other versions of the Hindu-Arabic numeral system. These are used extensively in older texts. In modern contexts, they have been replaced by standard Hindu-Arabic numerals.\n\nGurmukhī script was added to the Unicode Standard in October, 1991 with the release of version 1.0.\nMany sites still use proprietary fonts that convert Latin ASCII codes to Gurmukhī glyphs.\n\nThe Unicode block for Gurmukhī is U+0A00–U+0A7F:\nPanjab Digital Library has taken up digitisation of all available manuscripts of Gurmukhī Script. The script is just 500 years old, hence a lot of literature written in all these years is still traceable. Panjab Digital Library has digitised over 5 million pages from different manuscripts and most of them are available online.\n\n\n\n", "id": "13080", "title": "Gurmukhi alphabet"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13082", "text": "Geneva College\n\nGeneva College is a Christian liberal arts college in Beaver Falls, Pennsylvania, United States, north of Pittsburgh. Founded in 1848, in Northwood, Logan County, Ohio, the college moved to its present location in 1880, where it continues to educate a student body of about 1400 traditional undergraduates in over 30 majors, as well as graduate students in a handful of master's programs. It is the only undergraduate institution affiliated with the Reformed Presbyterian Church of North America (RPCNA). \n\nThe stated mission of the college is \"to glorify God by educating and ministering to a diverse community of students for the purpose of developing servant-leaders, transforming society for the kingdom of Christ.\" In 1967, the board of trustees adopted the \"Foundational Concepts of Christian Education,\" which continues to guide the institution. The college's undergraduate core curriculum emphasizes the humanities and the formation of a Reformed Christian worldview.\n\nGeneva College was founded in 1848 in Northwood, Ohio, by John Black Johnston, a minister of the RPCNA. The college was founded as \"Geneva Hall\", and was named after the Swiss center of the Reformed faith movement. After briefly closing during the American Civil War, the college continued operating in Northwood until 1880. By that time, the college leadership had begun a search for alternate locations that were closer to urban areas. After considering several locations in the Midwest, the denomination chose the College Hill neighborhood of Beaver Falls, Pennsylvania. The college constructed its current campus on land donated by the Harmony Society. Old Main, the oldest building on campus, was completed in 1881.\n\nThe Rapp Technical Design Center was completed in 2002. A major project to reroute Pennsylvania Route 18, which runs through the campus, was completed in November 2007. Improvements to Reeves Stadium and the construction of a campus entrance and pedestrian mall were completed in time for the fall semester in 2009.\n\nTwo bodies oversee the administration of the college, the Board of Corporators and the Board of Trustees; while the Corporators are the official legal owners of the college, in practice most authority is delegated to the Trustees, who are elected by the Corporators. Both Boards drafted the philosophical basis on which the college rests, known as the Foundational Concepts of Higher Education. The RPCNA still takes an active sponsorship and oversight role in the college: the college president, chaplain, and chairman of the Department of Biblical Studies must be members of the RPCNA, and all members of the Board of Corporators and the majority of the Board of Trustees must be RPCNA members. All professors and lecturers in the Department of Biblical Studies must subscribe to the Westminster Confession of Faith, and all full-time faculty and staff members must submit a written statement confessing faith in Jesus Christ and the Christian religion.\n\nGeneva offers undergraduate degree programs in the arts and sciences, such as elementary education, business, engineering, student ministry, biology, and psychology. In 2006, the Educational Testing Service (ETS) rated the Business and Accounting undergraduates in the 95th percentile amongst American colleges. \n\nGeneva offers a Degree Completion Program (DCP) for degrees in Human Resource Management, Community Ministry or Organizational Development for adult students mainly at off-campus locations. Geneva also established the Center for Urban Theological Studies in Philadelphia and has sister colleges in Taiwan (Christ College) and Korea (Chong Shin College and Theological Seminary). \n\nGeneva also offers graduates studies in several fields. These include a Master of Business Administration, a Masters of Science in Organizational Leadership, Masters of Education in Reading or Special Education, and Masters of Arts in Counseling or Higher Education. \n\nGeneva established the Center for Technology Development in 1986 for providing research, prototyping and technical support to local industries and entrepreneurs. The Center was awarded first prize in the Consolidated Natural Gas Company’s Annual Award of Excellence competition in 1990.\n\nGeneva College is a member institution of the Council for Christian Colleges and Universities, Council of Independent Colleges, and National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities. Accreditations include the Commission on Higher Education of the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools, Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology, Association of Collegiate Business Schools and Programs, American Chemical Society and the Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs.\n\nGeneva's sports teams are called the Golden Tornadoes. The college is a dual member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division III and National Christian College Athletic Association (NCCAA) Division I. The Golden Tornadoes compete as a member of the Presidents' Athletic Conference. Geneva was a member of the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA) for many years, and competed in the now-defunct American Mideast Conference. Geneva joined the NCAA as a provisional member in 2007 and during the transition process was not eligible for post season play or conference Player of the Week honors until gaining membership in July 2011.\n\nThe school offers a range of men's and women's varsity sports, including football, baseball, softball, basketball, volleyball, track & field, cross country, tennis, and soccer.\n\nFootball competition began in 1890 under head coach William McCracken. Over the years, the football team has amassed an all-time record of 496 wins, 437 losses, and 48 ties with five appearances in the Victory Bowl. The current football coach is Geno DeMarco.\n\nStudents must attend a designated number of weekly college-sponsored chapels to qualify for graduation. Alcohol is banned from the campus, and tobacco use is restricted from the entire campus. Greek letter fraternities and sororities are not permitted. \n\nOne of the earliest college basketball games in the United States occurred at Geneva College on April 8, 1893 when the Geneva College Covenanters defeated the New Brighton YMCA. Geneva commemorates this event through the athletic slogan of \"The Birthplace of College Basketball\". Geneva also has one of the oldest basketball courts in collegiate sports in the Johnson Gymnasium.\n\nGeneva was founded by Scottish and Scots-Irish immigrants. Many names of campus buildings and areas bear Scottish names:\n\nGeneva sports teams were nicknamed the \"Covenanters\" until the 1950s. Members of the RPCNA are sometimes referred to as Covenanters because the denomination traces its roots to the Covenanting tradition of Reformation era Scotland. The modern sports nickname of \"Golden Tornadoes\" commemorates the \"Golden Tornado\" of May 11, 1914 when a major tornado struck the college, most notably taking the gold colored roof from the top of Old Main, which was the origin of the associated color. Although the storm caused significant damage to the campus, there were no serious injuries. College students and faculty rejoiced at what they believed was a sign of God's mercy.\n\nGeneva's traditional sports rivalry is with Westminster College in nearby New Wilmington, Pennsylvania.\n\n\n\nFull-time undergraduate students between ages 17 and 23 are required to live in college housing, with the exception of commuters and some seniors. Six dorms — Clarke, Geneva Arms, McKee, Memorial, Pearce, and Young — house resident students. Geneva Arms and Young are apartment-style options divided into men's and women's wings. The college also operates six smaller houses, primarily for upperclassmen.\n\nThe following structures are owned by the college, but currently not being used for any activities or events.\n\n\nOn December 15, 2006, the college filed a federal lawsuit against the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, alleging that a decision by the state to block the college from participating in the state sponsored CareerLink job service amounted to a violation of the college's First Amendment rights. In response, the state argued that the college's requirement that faculty and staff members subscribe to the Christian religion amounted to discrimination, to which the college responded that the faculty religious test constituted a bona fide occupational qualification under existing federal employment law. The lawsuit was co-sponsored by the Association of Faith-Based Organizations and argued by the Christian Legal Society.\n\nIn April 2007, the college reached a settlement with CareerLink in U.S. District Court in Pittsburgh. Geneva's right to access to CareerLink will be restored and the college will retain the statement on its employment applications stating, \"Compliance with Geneva's Christian views is considered a bona fide occupational qualification ... and will have a direct impact on employment consideration.\"\n\nIn February 2012, Geneva College President Ken Smith announced a new federal lawsuit against the Obama administration’s mandate that religious employers provide abortifacients, sterilization, and contraception to employees regardless of religious or moral objections. This mandate, which is part of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and is commonly known as \"Obamacare\", has also been criticized by other religious groups as well as the owners of the retail chain Hobby Lobby.\n\nFor decades, both the college campus and Beaver Falls residents themselves had been wanting Pennsylvania Route 18 re-routed, as the route made a sharp s-turn through the campus. The s-turn was only 800 feet between the two turns, and while it would obviously cause problems for pedestrians (most of whom were students at the campus), it was also a danger for semi-trucks as well as drivers who would dangerously speed around the s-bend.\n\nAfter several years, a deal was finally reached, and PennDOT acquired the necessary land via eminent domain to straighten the road. Homeowners near the campus as well as a local car wash sold their property to PennDOT for the new right-of-way, which in itself caused controversy. Opponents pointed out how Geneva refused to give up some of its land (most of which at the time was underdeveloped) while at the same time doesn't have to pay taxes to the city.\nPennDOT also tried acquiring a local pizza shop, Pizza Dude, for the southern end of the new right-of-way, but the owner didn't want to sell the property since it would potentially lose business from the college students as well as no other suitable property nearby that would adequately replace his old building, a former Burger Chef location. PennDOT and the owner agreed to a compromise in which the owner got to stay on his property, but had to tear down the front portion of the building (which, for the time being, eliminated seating at the building) so that the right-of-way would have enough clearance from the building. The owner also gave up a portion of his parking lot, but the building itself would be protected by a grandfather clause requiring a certain length between a road and a building since it was a pre-existing building. In 2010, Pizza Dude moved on its own to downtown Beaver Falls, and the building is currently vacant.\n\nDuring construction, there was also controversy about the unused land between the new roadway and the old one, since Geneva didn't own all of the property. Geneva wanted the state to give the land the college didn't own for free. However, the state refused, but later sold the land (as well as the former Route 18 alignment, which became a private access road for the university) to Geneva. After construction of the new right-of-way was complete and opened, Geneva shrunk part of the southern end to a one-lane road (in order to make room for the expansion of Reeves Field) and put a sidewalk in where the northern end used to make the first bend in the s-turn, permanently blocking access to the s-bend. A traffic light was installed at the intersection along the new alignment with Geneva R.P. Church, requiring students to cross the street at the light.\n\n", "id": "13082", "title": "Geneva College"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13084", "text": "Gorillaz\n\nGorillaz are a British virtual band created in 1998 by Damon Albarn and Jamie Hewlett. The band consists of four animated members: 2D (lead vocals, keyboard), Murdoc Niccals (bass guitar, vocals), Noodle (guitar, keyboard, and backing vocals) and Russel Hobbs (drums and percussion). These members are completely fictional and are not personas of any \"real life\" musicians involved in the project. Their fictional universe is explored through the band's website and music videos, as well as a number of other media, such as short cartoons. In reality, Albarn is the only permanent musical contributor, and the music is often a collaboration between various musicians. Writers and critics have described their music as alternative rock, Britpop, trip hop, hip hop, electronica, indie, dub, reggae and pop.\n\nThe band's 2001 debut album \"Gorillaz\" sold over seven million copies and earned them an entry in the \"Guinness Book of World Records\" as the Most Successful Virtual Band. It was nominated for the Mercury Prize in 2001, but the nomination was later withdrawn at the band's request. Their second studio album, \"Demon Days\", released in 2005, went five times platinum in the UK. double platinum in the US, The band has won other awards, including one Grammy Award, two MTV Video Music Awards, an NME Award, three MTV Europe Music Awards, and have been nominated for nine Brit Awards. The combined sales of the \"Gorillaz\" and \"Demon Days\" albums had exceeded 15 million by 2007. The band's third studio album, \"Plastic Beach\", was released in March 2010. Their latest album, \"The Fall\", was released in December 2010 as a free download for fan club members, then in April 2011 as a physical release. Gorillaz released a new song on 19 January 2017, and plan to release a full length album in 2017. \n\nDamon Albarn and Jamie Hewlett first met in 1990 when Graham Coxon, a fan of Hewlett's work, asked him to interview Blur, which was a band both Albarn and Coxon had only recently formed. The interview was published in Deadline magazine, home of Hewlett's comic strip, \"Tank Girl\". Hewlett initially thought Albarn was \"arsey, a wanker\" and despite becoming one of the band's acquaintances, Hewlett often didn't get along with its members, especially after he started going out with Coxon's ex-girlfriend, Jane Olliver. Despite this, Albarn and Hewlett started sharing a flat on Westbourne Grove in London in 1997. Hewlett had recently broken up with Olliver and Albarn was also at the end of his highly publicised relationship with Justine Frischmann of Elastica.\n\nThe idea to create Gorillaz came about when the two were watching MTV. Hewlett said, \"If you watch MTV for too long, it's a bit like hell – there's nothing of substance there. So we got this idea for a cartoon band, something that would be a comment on that.\" The band originally identified themselves as \"Gorilla\" and the first song they recorded was \"Ghost Train\" which was later released as a B-side on their single \"Rock the House\" and the B-side compilation \"G Sides\". The musicians behind Gorillaz' first incarnation included Albarn, Del the Funky Homosapien, Dan the Automator and Kid Koala, who had previously worked together on the track \"Time Keeps on Slipping\" for Deltron 3030's eponymous debut album.\n\nAlthough not released under the Gorillaz name, Albarn has said that 'one of the first ever Gorillaz tunes' was Blur's 1997 single \"On Your Own\", which was released for their self-titled studio album \"Blur\".\n\nThe band's first release was the EP \"Tomorrow Comes Today\", released in 2000. The band's first single was \"Clint Eastwood\" and was released on 5 March 2001, reaching No. 4 in the UK. It was produced by hip hop producer Dan the Automator and originally featured Luton-based rap group Phi Life Cypher, but the version that appears on the album features American rapper Del the Funky Homosapien, known on the album as \"Del tha' Ghost Rapper\", a spirit in the band's drummer Russel Hobbs. The Phi Life Cypher version of \"Clint Eastwood\" appears on the B-side album \"G Sides\". Later that same month, their first full-length album, the self-titled \"Gorillaz\", was released, producing four singles: \"Clint Eastwood\", \"19-2000\", \"Tomorrow Comes Today\", and \"Rock the House\". In June 2001, \"19–2000\" charted at No. 6 in the UK, and the song was used as the title theme for EA Sports \"FIFA\" video game \"FIFA Football 2002\".\n\nThe end of the year brought the song \"911\", a collaboration between Gorillaz and hip-hop group D12 (without Eminem) and Terry Hall about the September 11 attacks. Meanwhile, \"G Sides\", a compilation of the B-sides from the \"Tomorrow Comes Today\" EP and first three singles, was released in Japan on 12 December 2001 and quickly followed with international releases in early 2002. Gorillaz performed at the 2002 Brit Awards in London on 22 February, appearing in 3D animation on four large screens along with rap accompaniment by Phi Life Cypher. The band was nominated for four Brit Awards, including Best British Group, Best British Album and Best British Newcomer, but left the award show empty-handed.\n\nIn November 2002, a DVD titled \"\" was released, giving the phase its name. The DVD contains the four Phase One promos, the abandoned video for \"5/4\", the \"Charts of Darkness\" documentary, the five Gorilla Bitez (comedic shorts starring the band characters), a tour of the website by the MEL 9000 server and more. The DVD's menu was designed much like the band's website and depicts an abandoned Kong Studios.\n\nRumours were circulating at this time that the Gorillaz team were busy preparing a film, but Hewlett said that the film project had been abandoned: \"We lost all interest in doing it as soon as we started meeting with studios and talking to these Hollywood executive types, we just weren't on the same page. We said, fuck it, we'll sit on the idea until we can do it ourselves, and maybe even raise the money ourselves.\"\n\nOn 8 December 2004, the band's website reopened with an exclusive video entitled \"Rock It\". The album \"Demon Days\" was released on 11 May 2005 in Japan, 23 May in the United Kingdom and Australia, and on 24 May in the United States. The album debuted at No. 1 on the UK Albums Chart.\n\nThe third single was \"Dirty Harry\", which had already been released as a promotional single earlier that year. It was released in the United Kingdom on 21 November 2005. On its first week, it charted at No. 6. The release of the single raised the album once again back up to the top 10. The fourth and final single was the double A-side, \"Kids with Guns\"/\"El Mañana\". It was released in the UK on 10 April 2006. Unlike its Top 10 predecessors, \"Kids With Guns\" / \"El Mañana\" reached No. 27 upon its release in the UK. A week later, the single had fallen out of the Top 40 in the UK (see 2006 in British music). By the end of 2005, \"Demon Days\" had sold over a million copies in the UK, making it the UK's fifth best selling album of 2005. \"Demon Days\" has since gone five times platinum in the UK, double platinum in the United States, triple platinum in Australia and has sold over 6 million copies worldwide. At the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards in Miami on 28 August, Gorillaz won two awards for \"Feel Good Inc.\", including the award for Breakthrough Video.\nGorillaz performed \"Dirty Harry\" at the 2006 Brit Awards in London, and the band was nominated for Best British Group, and Best British Album (\"Demon Days\"). Plans were unveiled for Gorillaz to go on a \"holographic\" world tour in 2007 and 2008. The cartoon members would be shown as virtual characters on stage using Musion Eyeliner technology, giving them a lifelike appearance on stage. The virtual characters were first used at the 2005 MTV Europe Music Awards on 3 November 2005 and again at the 2006 Grammy Awards on 8 February 2006 with the addition of a virtual Madonna, where the band played a pre-recorded version of \"Feel Good Inc.\" \nIn 2005, a set of Gorillaz figures were released by Kidrobot to coincide with the release of \"Demon Days\". Two variations of the set were released, known as the Red and Black editions, and a limited edition Noodle from the music video for \"DARE\" was also released. Three new sets of Gorillaz vinyl figures were released in 2006. The basic set which was limited to 60,000 was released on 16 October 2006, and on 2 November 2006 the two-tone set limited to 1,000 and the white edition which was limited to 4,000 were released.\n\nThe \"\" DVD was released on 30 October in the UK, and 31 October in the US. The official Gorillaz illustrated autobiography, titled \"Rise of the Ogre\", was released on 31 October 2006 in the UK, and 2 November in the US. \"D-Sides\", a compilation of B-side and remixes, was released on 19 November 2007 in the UK and on 20 November 2007 in the US.\n\nHopes for a Gorillaz film were revived in 2006 when Hewlett stated that they would be producing the film on their own. Film producer and the Weinstein Company co-chairman, Harvey Weinstein, was said to be collaborating with Albarn and Hewlett. In a September 2006 interview with \"Uncut\" magazine, Albarn was said that the band \"has been a fantastic journey which isn't over, because we're making a film. We've got Terry Gilliam involved. But as far as being in a big band and putting pop music out there, it's finished. We won't be doing that any more.\"\n\nOn 24 October 2007, the official Gorillaz fansite announced that a documentary film about Gorillaz, titled \"Bananaz\", would be released. The film, directed by Ceri Levy, documents the previous seven years of the band. The film was released online on the Babelgum website on 20 April 2009 followed by the DVD release on 1 June 2009.\n\nIn late 2007, Albarn and Hewlett began working on \"Carousel\", a new Gorillaz project which eventually evolved into the band's third studio album \"Plastic Beach\".\n\nAlbarn said \"I'm making this the biggest and most pop record I've ever made in many ways, but with all my experience to try and at least present something that has got depth.\" The album features guest performances by Snoop Dogg, Lou Reed, Mos Def, Bobby Womack, Gruff Rhys, Mark E. Smith, Mick Jones, Paul Simonon, Kano, Bashy, De La Soul, Little Dragon, Hypnotic Brass Ensemble, sinfonia ViVA, and the Lebanese National Orchestra for Oriental Arabic Music.\n\nOn 18 January 2010, it was announced that Gorillaz would be headlining the final night of the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival on 18 April 2010.\nThe first single from the album, \"Stylo\", featuring Bobby Womack and Mos Def was made available for download 26 January 2010.\n\nIn October 2010, Damon Albarn announced to the media that he would not let the cast of \"Glee\" cover the band's songs, claiming that the music on the Fox network's TV show is a \"very poor substitute for the real thing\". This statement led most people to believe that Gorillaz had been asked by \"Glee\" producers to lend their music to the show, which they had not. Albarn responded to the confusion with a laugh and said \"and now they definitely won't.\"\n\nOn 5 October 2010, Gorillaz announced their new single \"Doncamatic\" featuring Daley. On 8 December 2010, Albarn confirmed that a Gorillaz album recorded on the American leg of the Escape to Plastic Beach tour would be released to download for free exclusively to paying fan club members from the Gorillaz website on Christmas Day, 25 December 2010. The video for \"Phoner to Arizona\" was released on Gorillaz' official website for free on 24 December, and a day later, their new album was released entitled \"The Fall\".\n\nOn 18 April 2011, Gorillaz announced the release of their own version of the iPad app iElectribe, by Korg – which features loops and samples taken from \"The Fall\" as well as other samples. The new version features a Gorillaz designed and styled interface, and is customized to generate Gorillaz samples from their album \"The Fall\" and includes 128 new sounds created by the band and 64 ready-to-use pre-programmed patterns from Gorillaz, Stephen Sedgwick (Gorillaz' engineer) and Korg. There have been noted problems with the app's availability outside of the UK. The app was based on Korg's Electribe: R device app. On 5 October 2011, Gorillaz released their first \"greatest hits\" compilation, \"The Singles Collection 2001–2011\".\n\nOn 9 February 2012, Gorillaz announced \"DoYaThing\", a single to promote the Gorillaz-branded Converse shoes that were soon to be released. The song would be part of Converse's \"Three Artists, One Song\" projects, with the two collaborators being James Murphy of LCD Soundsystem and André 3000 of Outkast. An explicit, 13 minute-long version of the song became available for listening shortly after on Gorillaz.com. Hewlett returned to direct the single's music video, featuring animated versions of the two collaborators on the track.\n\nIn April 2012, Albarn told \"the Guardian\" that he and Hewlett had fallen out and that future Gorillaz projects were \"unlikely\". Tension between the two had been building during phase 3. On 25 April 2012, in an interview with Metro, Albarn said he had worked out his differences with Hewlett, that he was confident that they would make another record. On 24 June 2013, Hewlett stated that he and Albarn plan to someday record a follow-up to their 2010 album \"Plastic Beach\".\n\nIn April 2014, Albarn told \"the National Post\" that he \"wouldn't mind having another stab at a Gorillaz record.\" Two months later he reported that he had \"been writing quite a lot of songs on the road for Gorillaz\". On 19 October 2014, Albarn told \"The Sydney Morning Herald\" that he was planning to release new Gorillaz material in 2016.\n\nAlbarn has described the music that he's written for the next Gorillaz album as being very upbeat, humorous, and positive, stating that he plans on giving the tracks \"a benchmark of 125 bpm and nothing underneath that\", while also suggesting that it once again may have many collaborations.\n\nOn 16 July 2015, Albarn stated during an interview for ABC's 7.30 in Australia that he would begin work on the next Gorillaz album: \"I'm starting recording in September for a new Gorillaz record, I've just been really, really busy so I haven't had a chance. I'd love to just get back in to that routine of being at home and coming to the studio five days a week.\"\n\nSpeaking about his relationship with Hewlett, Albarn said that the pair's well publicised fall-out has helped their relationship in the long term: \"There are points in every relationship where they fall out with people that they're close to and then they reconcile, hopefully, and actually, you know the relationship's probably in a healthier place as a result of that,\" he said.\n\nIn October 2015, Albarn revealed to \"Rolling Stone\" that both he and Hewlett are working on a new Gorillaz album. Albarn said: \"I'm in the very early days on a new Gorillaz record. So far, it's really fast, and it's got quite a lot of energy. I've been stuck on piano, somewhere off Broadway, for years now. I want to go somewhere completely opposite of that.\"\n\nIn April 2016, Hewlett uploaded two video clips onto his Instagram showing the continued work on the album. The first clip featured Liam Bailey and rumoured executive producer on the album The Twilite Tone. The second clip was a time-lapse video featuring Albarn, Bailey, Twilite Tone and Jean Michel Jarre. Bailey had also implied in an Instagram post (which has since been deleted) that Massive Attack had been in the studio with the band as well. On 17 May 2016, it was revealed through Remi Kabaka's Instagram that Gorillaz were in the studio with Chicago-based hip-hop artist Vic Mensa. On 11 June 2016, Hewlett revealed that the new Gorillaz album had been delayed and the release year was pushed to 2017.\n\nOn 20 September 2016, the official Gorillaz website received a complete redesign and Gorillaz updated their social media profiles with a new profile picture and began adding an abridged retrospective timeline of the history of Gorillaz releases since 2000. On October 3, 2016 Gorillaz began posting a series of interactive multimedia stories revolving around the fictional lives of each Gorillaz character since their hiatus to their social media profiles, beginning with 'The Book of Noodle' and finishing with 'The Book of 2D'.\n\nOn 8 October 2016, Noodle was given her own official Instagram page and was eventually announced to be the official Global Ambassador of Jaguar Racing.\n\nOn 19th January 2017 a new single from the band entitled \"Hallelujah Money\" featuring Benjamin Clementine was released. A press release from the band also confirmed that the song will not be included on the band's upcoming album, which is due to be released later in 2017.\n\nIn March 2001, Gorillaz played their first show at the Scala in London before embarking on a UK tour later that summer, with one date in Paris and two in Japan. During this tour the live band played behind a giant projector screen which covered the whole stage, on which was projected various visuals and images created by Hewlett. After taking a short break over the holidays, the tour resumed with a North American leg in February 2002.\nFrom 1–5 November 2005, Gorillaz played a five night residency at the Manchester Opera House in Manchester, England. The event was filmed by an EMI film crew for a DVD release, \"Demon Days Live\", in late March 2006. It was later announced that an American version of the event would take place from 2 to 6 April 2006 at the Apollo Theater in Harlem, New York. Within an hour of release tickets were sold out. The 6 April show was filmed for a live webcast at MSN Video. Palladia (then known as MHD) also broadcast an Apollo Theater show in HDTV on 31 December 2006.\n\nIn March 2010, Gorillaz began a short six date tour as \"rehearsal\" shows for their headlining slot at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival. The shows were open exclusively to Gorillaz Sub Division fan club members and featured no visuals whatsoever. These performances were the band's first public performances in four years. Gorillaz headlined the final night of the Coachella Festival on 18 April 2010 as their first proper, full show of Phase 3. On 27 April they were the main guests on \"Later... with Jools Holland\" on the BBC. In addition, Gorillaz played a two-night residency at London's Camden Roundhouse (29 and 30 April 2010). Mick Jones and Paul Simonon of the Clash performed guitar and bass respectively with the band and more than once in the evening chords from the Clash song \"Guns of Brixton\" were heard as a subtle reference to their presence.\n\nGorillaz kicked off their first ever world tour in October 2010, with some preceding festival dates in the Summer, such as at the Byblos Festival in Lebanon, the Roskilde Festival in Denmark, the Glastonbury Festival in England and one show at the Citadel of Damascus in Syria. The Escape to Plastic Beach Tour took them across North America in October, Europe in November, and finally through Australia, New Zealand, and with one date in Hong Kong in December. During the final show of the tour at the Vector Arena in Auckland, New Zealand on 21 December 2010, Albarn announced that it would be their final show with the \"Plastic Beach\" line up.\n\nThe band performed \"Clint Eastwood\" live for the first time with both Damon Albarn and Del the Funky Homosapien at Fader Fort in March, 2014, and again shortly after at Bonnaroo Music Festival in Manchester, Tennessee, US.\n\nCurrent fictional members\nActual members\nCurrent live members\n\nFormer live members\nTimeline\n\n\n", "id": "13084", "title": "Gorillaz"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13086", "text": "Gayo\n\nGayo may refer to:\n\n\n", "id": "13086", "title": "Gayo"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13087", "text": "GW-BASIC\n\nGW-BASIC is a dialect of the BASIC programming language developed by Microsoft from BASICA, originally for Compaq. It is otherwise identical to Microsoft/IBM BASICA, but is a fully self-contained executable and does not need the ROM BASIC. It was bundled with MS-DOS operating systems on IBM PC compatibles by Microsoft. Microsoft also sold a BASIC compiler, BASCOM, compatible with GW-BASIC, for programs needing more speed. The language is suitable for simple games, business programs and the like. Since it was included with most versions of MS-DOS, it was also a low cost way for many would-be programmers to learn the fundamentals of computer programming. With the release of MS-DOS 5.0, GW-BASIC's place was eventually taken by QBasic, the interpreter part of the separately available QuickBASIC compiler.\n\nIBM BASICA and GW-BASIC are direct ports of Microsoft's BASIC-80 (also known as MBASIC) designed for 8080/Z80 machines, but added features specifically for the IBM PC hardware. Common features of BASIC-80 and BASICA/GW-BASIC include:\n\n\nConversely, BASIC-80/BASICA/GW-BASIC does not allow the line crunching in 6502 versions (where no spaces are required on a program line).\n\nMBASIC programs not using PEEK/POKE statements would run under GW-BASIC. BASICA added a large number of features for the IBM PC such as sound, graphics, and memory commands.\n\nMicrosoft did not offer a generic version of MS-DOS until v3.20 in 1986 and before then, all variants of the OS were OEM ones. Depending on the OEM, BASIC was distributed as either BASICA.EXE or GWBASIC.EXE. The former should not be confused with IBM BASICA, which always came as a .COM file. Some variants of BASIC had extra features to support a particular machine (for example, the AT&T and Tandy versions of DOS included a special GW-BASIC that supported their enhanced sound and graphics capabilities).\n\nThe initial version of GW-BASIC was the one included with Compaq DOS 1.13 (released with the Compaq Portable in 1983) and was analogous to IBM BASICA 1.10. It used the CP/M-derived file control blocks for disk access and did not support subdirectories. Later versions added this feature and improved graphics and other capabilities.\n\nGW-BASIC 3.20 (1986) added EGA graphics support (no version of BASICA or GW-BASIC had VGA support) and was in effect the last new version released before it was superseded by QBasic.\n\nBuyers of Hercules Graphics Cards received a special version of GW-BASIC on the card's utility disk that was called HBASIC and which added support for its 720×348 monochrome graphics (other versions of BASICA/GW-BASIC only allowed graphics on Hercules cards if SIMCGA was loaded).\n\nGW-BASIC has a command line-based integrated development environment (IDE) based on Dartmouth BASIC. Using the cursor movement keys, any line displayed on screen can be edited. It also includes function key shortcuts at the bottom of the screen. Like other early microcomputer versions of BASIC, GW-BASIC lacked many of the structures needed for structured programming such as local variables, and GW-BASIC programs executed relatively slowly, because it was an interpreted programming language. All program lines must be numbered; all non-numbered lines are considered to be commands in direct mode to be executed immediately. Program source files are normally saved in binary compressed format with tokens replacing commands, with an option to save in ASCII text form.\n\nThe GW-BASIC command-line environment has commands to codice_1 the current program, or quit to the operating codice_2; these commands can also be used as program statements. There is little support for structured programming in GW-BASIC. All codice_3 conditional statements must be written on one line, although codice_4 statements may group multiple lines. Functions can only be defined using the single line codice_5 statement (e.g., codice_6). The data type of variables can be specified with a character at the end of the variable name: codice_7 is a string of characters, codice_8 is an integer, etc. Groups of variables can also be set to default types based on the initial letter of their name by use of the codice_9, etc., statements. The default type for undeclared variables not identified by such typing statements, is single-precision floating point (32-bit MBF).\n\nGW-BASIC allowed use of joystick and light pen input devices. GW-BASIC can read from and write to files and COM ports; it can also do event trapping for ports. Since the cassette port interface of the original IBM PC was never implemented on compatibles, cassette operations are not supported. GW-BASIC can play simple music using the codice_10 statement, needing a string of notes represented in a music macro language (e.g. codice_11). More low-level control is possible with the codice_12 statement, which takes the arguments of a frequency in hertz and a length in clock ticks for the standard internal PC speaker in IBM machines. Consequently, sound is limited to single channel beeps and whistles as befits a 'business' machine. Home-based PCs such as the Tandy 1000 allowed up to three channels of sound for the codice_12 and codice_10 commands.\n\nThere are several theories on what the initials \"GW\" stand for. Greg Whitten, an early Microsoft employee who developed the standards in the company's BASIC compiler line, says Bill Gates picked the name GW-BASIC. Whitten refers to it as \"Gee-Whiz\" BASIC and is unsure if Gates named the program after him. The \"Microsoft User Manual\" from Microsoft Press also refers to it by this name. It may have also been nicknamed \"Gee-Whiz\" because it had a large number of graphics commands. Other common theories as to the initials' origins include \"Graphics and Windows\", \"Gates, William\" (Microsoft's president at the time), or \"Gates-Whitten\" (the two main designers of the program).\n\n\n", "id": "13087", "title": "GW-BASIC"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13088", "text": "Granite\n\nGranite () is a common type of felsic intrusive igneous rock that is granular and phaneritic in texture. Granites can be predominantly white, pink, or gray in color, depending on their mineralogy. The word \"granite\" comes from the Latin \"granum\", a grain, in reference to the coarse-grained structure of such a holocrystalline rock. By definition, granite is an igneous rock with at least 20% quartz and up to 65% alkali feldspar by volume.\n\nThe term \"granitic\" means granite-like and is applied to granite and a group of intrusive igneous rocks with similar textures and slight variations in composition and origin. These rocks mainly consist of feldspar, quartz, mica, and amphibole minerals, which form an interlocking, somewhat equigranular matrix of feldspar and quartz with scattered darker biotite mica and amphibole (often hornblende) peppering the lighter color minerals. Occasionally some individual crystals (phenocrysts) are larger than the groundmass, in which case the texture is known as porphyritic. A granitic rock with a porphyritic texture is known as a granite porphyry. Granitoid is a general, descriptive field term for lighter-colored, coarse-grained igneous rocks. Petrographic examination is required for identification of specific types of granitoids.\n\nGranite differs from granodiorite in that at least 35% of the feldspar in granite is alkali feldspar as opposed to plagioclase; it is the potassium feldspar that gives many granites a distinctive pink color. The extrusive igneous rock equivalent of granite is rhyolite.\n\nGranite is nearly always massive (lacking any internal structures), hard and tough, and therefore it has gained widespread use throughout human history, and more recently as a construction stone. The average density of granite is between 2.65 and 2.75 g/cm (165.4 - 171.7 lb/ft), its compressive strength usually lies above 200 MPa, and its viscosity near STP is 3–6 • 10 Pa·s.\n\nThe melting temperature of dry granite at ambient pressure is ; it is strongly reduced in the presence of water, down to 650 °C at a few kBar pressure.\n\nGranite has poor primary permeability, but strong secondary permeability.\n\nGranite is classified according to the QAPF diagram for coarse grained plutonic rocks and is named according to the percentage of quartz, alkali feldspar (orthoclase, sanidine, or microcline) and plagioclase feldspar on the A-Q-P half of the diagram. True granite according to modern petrologic convention contains both plagioclase and alkali feldspars. When a granitoid is devoid or nearly devoid of plagioclase, the rock is referred to as alkali feldspar granite. When a granitoid contains less than 10% orthoclase, it is called tonalite; pyroxene and amphibole are common in tonalite. A granite containing both muscovite and biotite micas is called a binary or \"two-mica\" granite. Two-mica granites are typically high in potassium and low in plagioclase, and are usually S-type granites or A-type granites.\n\nA worldwide average of the chemical composition of granite, by weight percent, based on 2485 analyses:\n\nOutcrops of granite tend to form tors and rounded massifs. Granites sometimes occur in circular depressions surrounded by a range of hills, formed by the metamorphic aureole or hornfels. Granite is usually found in the continental plates of the Earth's crust.\n\nGranite is currently known to exist only on Earth, where it forms a major part of the continental crust. Granite often occurs as relatively small, less than 100 km² stock masses (stocks) and in batholiths that are often associated with orogenic mountain ranges. Small dikes of granitic composition called aplites are often associated with the margins of granitic intrusions. In some locations, very coarse-grained pegmatite masses occur with granite.\n\nGranite has been intruded into the crust of the Earth during all geologic periods, although much of it is of Precambrian age. Granitic rock is widely distributed throughout the continental crust and is the most abundant basement rock that underlies the relatively thin sedimentary veneer of the continents.\n\nGranite has a felsic composition and is more common in recent geologic time in contrast to Earth's ultramafic ancient igneous history. Felsic rocks are less dense than mafic and ultramafic rocks, and thus they tend to escape subduction, whereas basaltic or gabbroic rocks tend to sink into the mantle beneath the granitic rocks of the continental cratons. Therefore, granitic rocks form the basement of all land continents.\n\nGranitoids are a ubiquitous component of the crust. They have crystallized from magmas that have compositions at or near a eutectic point (or a temperature minimum on a cotectic curve). Magmas will evolve to the eutectic because of igneous differentiation, or because they represent low degrees of partial melting. Fractional crystallisation serves to reduce a melt in iron, magnesium, titanium, calcium and sodium, and enrich the melt in potassium and silicon – alkali feldspar (rich in potassium) and quartz (SiO), are two of the defining constituents of granite.\n\nThis process operates regardless of the origin of the parental magma to the granite, and regardless of its chemistry. However, the composition and origin of the magma that differentiates into granite leaves certain geochemical and mineral evidence as to what the granite's parental rock was. The final mineralogy, texture and chemical composition of a granite is often distinctive as to its origin. For instance, a granite that is formed from melted sediments may have more alkali feldspar, whereas a granite derived from melted basalt may be richer in plagioclase feldspar. It is on this basis that the modern \"alphabet\" classification schemes are based. Granite has a slow cooling process which forms larger crystals.\n\nThe letter-based Chappell & White classification system was proposed initially to divide granites into \"I-type\" granite (or igneous protolith) granite and \"S-type\" or sedimentary protolith granite. Both of these types of granite are formed by the melting of high grade metamorphic rocks, either other granite or intrusive mafic rocks, or buried sediment, respectively.\n\nM-type or mantle derived granite was later proposed to cover those granites that were clearly sourced from crystallized mafic magmas, generally sourced from the mantle. These are rare, because it is difficult to turn basalt into granite via fractional crystallisation.\n\nA-type or \"anorogenic\" granites are formed above volcanic \"hot spot\" activity and have a peculiar mineralogy and geochemistry. These granites are formed by the melting of the lower crust under conditions that are usually extremely dry. A-type granites occur in the Koettlitz Glacier Alkaline Province in the Royal Society Range, Antarctica. The rhyolites of the Yellowstone caldera are examples of volcanic equivalents of A-type granite.\n\nH-type or \"hybrid\" granites are formed following a mixing of two granitic magmas from different sources, e.g. M-type and S-type.\n\nAn old, and largely discounted theory, \"granitization\" states that granite is formed in place by extreme metasomatism by fluids bringing in elements, e.g. potassium, and removing others, e.g. calcium, to transform the metamorphic rock into a granite. This was supposed to occur across a migrating front. The production of granite by metamorphic heat is difficult, but is observed to occur in certain amphibolite and granulite terrains. In-situ granitisation or melting by metamorphism is difficult to recognise except where leucosome and melanosome textures are present in migmatites. Once a metamorphic rock is melted it is no longer a metamorphic rock and is a magma, so these rocks are seen as a transitional between the two, but are not technically granite as they do not actually intrude into other rocks. In all cases, melting of solid rock requires high temperature, and also water or other volatiles which act as a catalyst by lowering the solidus temperature of the rock.\n\nThe ascent and emplacement of large volumes of granite within the upper continental crust is a source of much debate amongst geologists. There is a lack of field evidence for any proposed mechanisms, so hypotheses are predominantly based upon experimental data. There are two major hypotheses for the ascent of magma through the crust:\n\n\nOf these two mechanisms, Stokes diapir was favoured for many years in the absence of a reasonable alternative. The basic idea is that magma will rise through the crust as a single mass through buoyancy. As it rises, it heats the wall rocks, causing them to behave as a power-law fluid and thus flow around the pluton allowing it to pass rapidly and without major heat loss. This is entirely feasible in the warm, ductile lower crust where rocks are easily deformed, but runs into problems in the upper crust which is far colder and more brittle. Rocks there do not deform so easily: for magma to rise as a pluton it would expend far too much energy in heating wall rocks, thus cooling and solidifying before reaching higher levels within the crust.\n\nFracture propagation is the mechanism preferred by many geologists as it largely eliminates the major problems of moving a huge mass of magma through cold brittle crust. Magma rises instead in small channels along self-propagating dykes which form along new or pre-existing fracture or fault systems and networks of active shear zones. As these narrow conduits open, the first magma to enter solidifies and provides a form of insulation for later magma.\n\nGranitic magma must make room for itself or be intruded into other rocks in order to form an intrusion, and several mechanisms have been proposed to explain how large batholiths have been emplaced:\n\nMost geologists today accept that a combination of these phenomena can be used to explain granite intrusions, and that not all granites can be explained entirely by one or another mechanism.\n\nPhysical weathering occurs on a large scale in the form of exfoliation joints, which are the result of granite expanding and fracturing as pressure is relieved when overlying material is removed by erosion or other processes.\n\nChemical weathering of granite occurs when dilute carbonic acid, and other acids present in rain and soil waters, readily alter feldspar in a process called hydrolysis. As demonstrated in the following reaction, this causes potassium feldspar to form kaolinite, with potassium ions, bicarbonate and silica in solution as byproducts. An endproduct of granite weathering is grus, which is often made up of coarse-grained fragments of disintegrated granite.\n\nClimatic variations also influence the weathering rate of granites. For about two thousand years, the relief engravings on Cleopatra's Needle obelisk had survived the arid conditions of its origin prior to its transfer to London. Within two hundred years, the red granite has drastically deteriorated in the damp and polluted air.\n\nGranite is a natural source of radiation, like most natural stones. However, some granites have been reported to have higher radioactivity, thereby raising some concerns about their safety.\n\nPotassium-40 is a radioactive isotope of weak emission, and a constituent of alkali feldspar, which in turn is a common component of granitic rocks, more abundant in alkali feldspar granite and syenites. Naturally, a geiger counter should register this low effect.\n\nSome granites contain around 10 to 20 parts per million (ppm) of uranium. By contrast, more mafic rocks, such as tonalite, gabbro and diorite, have 1 to 5 ppm uranium, and limestones and sedimentary rocks usually have equally low amounts. Many large granite plutons are sources for palaeochannel-hosted or roll front uranium ore deposits, where the uranium washes into the sediments from the granite uplands and associated, often highly radioactive, pegmatites. Cellars and basements sunk into soils over granite can become a trap for radon gas, which is formed by the decay of uranium. Radon gas poses significant health concerns, and is the number two cause of lung cancer in the US behind smoking.\n\nThorium occurs in all granites as well. Conway granite has been noted for its relatively high thorium concentration of 56±6 ppm.\n\nThere is some concern that materials sold as granite countertops or as building material may be hazardous to health. Dan Steck of St. Johns University, has stated\nthat approximately 5% of all granite will be of concern, with the caveat that only a tiny percentage of the tens of thousands of granite slab types have been tested. Various resources from national geological survey organizations are accessible online to assist in assessing the risk factors in granite country and design rules relating, in particular, to preventing accumulation of radon gas in enclosed basements and dwellings.\n\nA study of granite countertops was done (initiated and paid for by the Marble Institute of America) in November 2008 by National Health and Engineering Inc of USA. In this test, all of the 39 full size granite slabs that were measured for the study showed radiation levels well below the European Union safety standards (section 4.1.1.1 of the National Health and Engineering study) and radon emission levels well below the average outdoor radon concentrations in the US.\n\nGranite and related marble industries are considered one of the oldest industries in the world; existing as far back as Ancient Egypt.\n\nMajor modern exporters of granite include China, India, Italy, Brazil, Canada, Germany, Sweden and Spain .\n\nIndian granite quarries have been mired in controversy over child labor and slavery.\n\nThe Red Pyramid of Egypt (c.26th century BC), named for the light crimson hue of its exposed limestone surfaces, is the third largest of Egyptian pyramids. Menkaure's Pyramid, likely dating to the same era, was constructed of limestone and granite blocks. The Great Pyramid of Giza (c.2580 BC) contains a huge granite sarcophagus fashioned of \"Red Aswan Granite\". The mostly ruined Black Pyramid dating from the reign of Amenemhat III once had a polished granite pyramidion or capstone, now on display in the main hall of the Egyptian Museum in Cairo (see Dahshur). Other uses in Ancient Egypt include columns, door lintels, sills, jambs, and wall and floor veneer. How the Egyptians worked the solid granite is still a matter of debate. Dr. Patrick Hunt has postulated that the Egyptians used emery shown to have higher hardness on the Mohs scale.\n\nRajaraja Chola I of the Chola Dynasty in South India built the world's first temple entirely of granite in the 11th century AD in Tanjore, India. The Brihadeeswarar Temple dedicated to Lord Shiva was built in 1010. The massive Gopuram (ornate, upper section of shrine) is believed to have a mass of around 81 tonnes. It was the tallest temple in south India.\n\nIn some areas, granite is used for gravestones and memorials. Granite is a hard stone and requires skill to carve by hand. Until the early 18th century, in the Western world, granite could only be carved by hand tools with generally poor results.\n\nA key breakthrough was the invention of steam-powered cutting and dressing tools by Alexander MacDonald of Aberdeen, inspired by seeing ancient Egyptian granite carvings. In 1832, the first polished tombstone of Aberdeen granite to be erected in an English cemetery was installed at Kensal Green Cemetery. It caused a sensation in the London monumental trade and for some years all polished granite ordered came from MacDonalds. Working with the sculptor William Leslie, and later Sidney Field, granite memorials became a major status symbol in Victorian Britain. The royal sarcophagus at Frogmore was probably the pinnacle of its work, and at 30 tons one of the largest. It was not until the 1880s that rival machinery and works could compete with the MacDonald works.\n\nModern methods of carving include using computer-controlled rotary bits and sandblasting over a rubber stencil. Leaving the letters, numbers and emblems exposed on the stone, the blaster can create virtually any kind of artwork or epitaph.\n\nThe rock known as \"black granite\" is usually gabbro, which has a completely different chemical composition.\n\nGranite has been extensively used as a dimension stone and as flooring tiles in public and commercial buildings and monuments. Aberdeen in Scotland, which is constructed principally from local granite, is known as \"The Granite City\". Because of its abundance, granite was commonly used to build foundations for homes in New England. The Granite Railway, America's first railroad, was built to haul granite from the quarries in Quincy, Massachusetts, to the Neponset River in the 1820s. With increasing amounts of acid rain in parts of the world, granite has begun to supplant marble as a monument material, since it is much more durable. Polished granite is also a popular choice for kitchen countertops due to its high durability and aesthetic qualities. In building and for countertops, the term \"granite\" is often applied to all igneous rocks with large crystals, and not specifically to those with a granitic composition.\n\nEngineers have traditionally used polished granite surface plates to establish a plane of reference, since they are relatively impervious and inflexible. Sandblasted concrete with a heavy aggregate content has an appearance similar to rough granite, and is often used as a substitute when use of real granite is impractical. A most unusual use of granite was in the construction of the rails for the Haytor Granite Tramway, Devon, England, in 1820. Granite block is usually processed into slabs and after can be cut and shaped by a cutting center. Granite tables are used extensively as a base for optical instruments due to granite's rigidity, high dimensional stability and excellent vibration characteristics. In military engineering Finland planted granite boulders along its Mannerheim Line to block invasion by Russian tanks in the winter war of 1940.\n\nCurling stones are traditionally fashioned of Ailsa Craig granite. The first stones were made in the 1750s, the original source being Ailsa Craig in Scotland. Because of the particular rarity of the granite, the best stones can cost as much as US$1,500. Between 60 and 70 percent of the stones used today are made from Ailsa Craig granite, although the island is now a wildlife reserve and is still used for quarrying under license for Ailsa granite by Kays of Mauchline for curling stones.\n\nGranite is one of the rocks most prized by climbers, for its steepness, soundness, crack systems, and friction. Well-known venues for granite climbing include Yosemite, the Bugaboos, the Mont Blanc massif (and peaks such as the Aiguille du Dru, the Mountains of Mourne, the Adamello-Presanella Alps, the Aiguille du Midi and the Grandes Jorasses), the Bregaglia, Corsica, parts of the Karakoram (especially the Trango Towers), the Fitzroy Massif, Patagonia, Baffin Island, Ogawayama, the Cornish coast, the Cairngorms, Sugarloaf Mountain in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, and the Stawamus Chief, British Columbia, Canada.\n\nGranite rock climbing is so popular that many of the artificial rock climbing walls found in gyms and theme parks are made to look and feel like granite.\n\n\n", "id": "13088", "title": "Granite"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13089", "text": "Global Climate Coalition\n\nThe Global Climate Coalition (GCC) (1989–2001) was an international lobbyist group of businesses that opposed action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and challenged the science behind global warming. The GCC was the largest industry group active in climate policy and the most prominent industry advocate in international climate negotiations. The GCC was involved in opposition to the Kyoto Protocol, and played a role in blocking ratification by the United States. The coalition promoted the views of climate skeptics. The GCC dissolved in 2001 after membership declined in the face of improved understanding of the role of greenhouse gases in climate change and of public criticism.\n\nThe Global Climate Coalition (GCC) was formed in 1989 as a project under the auspices of the National Association of Manufacturers. The GCC was formed to represent the interests of the major producers and users of fossil fuels, to oppose regulation to mitigate global warming, and to challenge the science behind global warming. Context for the founding of the GCC from 1988 included the establishment of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and NASA climatologist James Hansen's congressional testimony that climate change was occurring. The government affairs' offices of five or six corporations recognized that they had been inadequately organized for the Montreal Protocol, the international treaty that phased out ozone depleting chlorofluorocarbons, and the Clean Air Act in the United States, and recognized that fossil fuels would be targeted for regulation.\n\nAccording to GCC's mission statement on the home page of its website, GCC was established: \"to coordinate business participation in the international policy debate on the issue of global climate change and global warming,\" and GCC's executive director in a 1993 press release said GCC was organized \"as the leading voice for industry on the global climate change issue.\"\n\nGCC reorganized independently in 1992, with the first chairman of the board of directors being the director of government relations for the Phillips Petroleum Company. Exxon was a founding member, and a founding member of the GCC's board of directors. Exxon, and later ExxonMobil, had a leadership role in coalition. The American Petroleum Institute (API) was a leading member of the coalition. API's executive vice president was a chairman of the coalition's board of directors. Other GCC founding members included the National Coal Association, United States Chamber of Commerce, American Forest & Paper Association, and Edison Electric Institute. GCC's executive director John Shleas was previously the director of government relations at the Edison Electric Institute. GCC was run by Ruder Finn, a public relations firm.\n\nGCC was the largest industry group active in climate policy. About 40 companies and industry associations were GCC members. Considering member corporations, member trade associations, and business represented by member trade associations, GCC represented over 230,000 businesses. Industry sectors represented included: aluminium, paper, transportation, power generation, petroleum, chemical, and small businesses. All the major oil companies were members. GCC members were from industries that would have been adversely effected by limitations on fossil fuel consumption. GCC was funded by membership dues.\n\nGCC was one of the most powerful lobbyist groups against action to mitigate global warming. It was the most prominent industry advocate in international climate negotiations, and led a campaign opposed to policies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The GCC was one of the most powerful non-governmental organizations representing business interests in climate policy, according to Kal Raustiala, professor at the UCLA School of Law.\n\nGCC's advocacy activities included lobbying government officials, grassroots lobbying through press releases and advertising, participation in international climate conferences, criticism of the processes of international climate organizations, critiques of climate models, and personal attacks on scientists and environmentalists. Policy positions advocated by the coalition included denial of anthropogenic climate change, emphasizing the uncertainty in climatology, advocating for additional research, highlighting the benefits and downplaying the risks of climate change, stressing the priority of economic development, defending national sovereignty, and opposition to the regulation of greenhouse gas emissions.\n\nGCC sent delegations to all of the major international climate conventions. Only nations and non-profits may send official delegates to the United Nations Climate Change conferences. GCC registered with the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change as a non-governmental organization, and executives from GCC members attended official UN conferences as GCC delegates.\n\nIn 1990, after U. S. President George H. W. Bush addressed the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) urging caution in responding to global warming, and offering no new proposals, GCC said Bush's speech was \"very strong\" and concurred with the priorities of economic development and additional research. GCC sent 30 attendees to the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, where it lobbied to keep targets and timetables out of the Framework Convention on Climate Change. In December, 1992 GCC's executive director wrote in a letter to \"The New York Times\": \"...there is considerable debate on whether or not man-made greenhouse gases (produced primarily by burning fossil fuels) are triggering a dangerous 'global warming' trend.\" In 1992 GCC distributed a half-hour video entitled \"The Greening of Planet Earth\", to hundreds of journalists, the White House, and several Middle Eastern oil-producing countries, which suggested that increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide could boost crop yields and solve world hunger.\n\nIn 1993, after U. S. President Bill Clinton pledged \"to reducing our emissions of greenhouse gases to their 1990 levels by the year 2000,\" GCC's executive director said it \"could jeopardize the economic health of the nation.\" GCC's lobbying was key to the defeat in the United States Senate of Clinton's 1993 BTU tax proposal. In 1994, after United States Secretary of Energy Hazel R. O'Leary said the 1992 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change needed to be strengthened, and that voluntary carbon dioxide reductions may not be enough, GCC said it was: \"disturbed by the implication that the President's voluntary climate action plan, which is just getting under way, will be inadequate and that more stringent measures may be needed domestically.\"\n\nGCC did not fund original scientific research and its climate claims relied largely on the \"World Climate Review\" and its successor the \"World Climate Report\" edited by Patrick Michaels and funded by the Western Fuels Association. GCC promoted the views of climate skeptics such as Michaels, Fred Singer, and Richard Lindzen. In 1996, GCC published a report entitled \"Global warming and extreme weather: fact vs. fiction\" written by Robert E. Davis.\n\nGCC members questioned the efficacy of climate change denial and shifted their message to highlighting the economic costs of proposed greenhouse gas emission regulations and the limited effectiveness of proposals exempting developing nations. In 1995, after the United Nations Climate Change conference in Berlin agreed to negotiate greenhouse gas emission limits, GCC's executive director said the agreement gave \"developing countries like China, India and Mexico a free ride\" and would \"change the relations between sovereign countries and the United Nations. This could have very significant implications. It could be a way of capping our economy.\" At a Washington, D.C. press conference on the eve of the second United Nations Climate Change conference in Geneva, GCC's executive director said, \"The time for decision is not yet now.\" At the conference in Geneva, GCC issued a statement that said it was too early to determine the causes of global warming. GCC representatives lobbied scientists at the September, 1996 IPCC conference in Mexico City.\n\nAfter actor Leonardo DiCaprio, chairman of Earth Day 2000, interviewed Clinton for ABC News, GCC sent out an e-mail that said that DiCaprio's first car was a Jeep Grand Cherokee and that his current car was a Chevrolet Tahoe.\n\nIn 1995, GCC assembled an advisory committee of scientific and technical experts to compile an internal-only, 17-page report on climate science entitled \"Predicting Future Climate Change: A Primer\", which said: “The scientific basis for the Greenhouse Effect and the potential impact of human emissions of greenhouse gases such as CO2 on climate is well established and cannot be denied.” In early 1996, GCC's operating committee asked the advisory committee to redact the sections that rebutted contrarian arguments, and accepted the report and distributed it to members. The draft document was disclosed in a 2007 lawsuit filed by the auto industry against California’s efforts to regulate automotive greenhouse gas emissions.\n\nAccording to \"The New York Times\", the primer demonstrated that \"even as the coalition worked to sway opinion, its own scientific and technical experts were advising that the science backing the role of greenhouse gases in global warming could not be refuted.\" According to the Union of Concerned Scientists in 2015, the primer was: \"remarkable for indisputably showing that, while some fossil fuel companies’ deception about climate science has continued to the present day, at least two decades ago the companies’ own scientific experts were internally alerting them about the realities and implications of climate change.\"\n\nGCC was an industry participant in the review process of the IPCC Second Assessment Report. In 1996, prior to the publication of the Second Assessment Report, GCC distributed a report entitled \"The IPCC: Institutionalized Scientific Cleansing\" to reporters, US Congressmen, and scientists. The coalition report said that Benjamin D. Santer, the lead author of Chapter 8 in the assessment, entitled \"Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes,\" had altered the text, after acceptance by the Working Group, and without approval of the authors, to strike content characterizing the uncertainty of the science. Frederick Seitz repeated GCC's charges in a letter to the \"Wall Street Journal\" published June 12, 1996. The coalition ran newspaper advertisements that said: \"unless the management of the IPCC promptly undertakes to republish the printed versions...the IPCC's credibility will have been lost.\"\n\nSanter and his co-authors said the edits were integrations of comments from peer review as per agreed IPCC processes.\n\nGCC was the main industry group in the United States opposed to the Kyoto Protocol, which committed signatories to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The coalition \"was the leading industry group working in opposition to the Kyoto Protocol,\" according to Greenpeace, and led opposition to the Kyoto Protocol, according to the \"Los Angeles Times.\"\n\nPrior to 1997, GCC spent about $1 million annually lobbying against limits on emissions; before Kyoto, GCC annual revenue peaked around $1.5 million; GCC spent $13 million on advertising in opposition to the Kyoto treaty. The coalition funded the Global Climate Information Project and hired the advertising firm that produced the 1993-1994 Harry and Louise advertising campaign which opposed Clinton's health care initiative. The advertisements said, “the UN Climate Treaty isn’t Global...and it won’t work” and \"Americans will pay the price...50 cents more for every gallon of gasoline.\"\n\nGCC opposed the signing of the Kyoto Protocol by Clinton. GCC was influential in the withdrawal from the Kyoto Protocol by the administration of President George W. Bush. According to briefing notes prepared by the United States Department of State for the under-secretary of state, Bush's rejection of the Kyoto Protocol was \"in part based on input from\" GCC. GCC lobbying was key to the July, 1997 unanimous passage in the United States Senate of the Byrd-Hagel Resolution, which reflected the coalition's position that restrictions on greenhouse gas emissions must include developing countries. GCC's chairman told a US congressional committee that mandatory greenhouse gas emissions limits were: \"an unjustified rush to judgement.\" The coalition sent 50 delegates to the third Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Kyoto. On December 11, 1997, the day the Kyoto delegates reached agreement on legally binding limits on greenhouse gas emissions, GCC's chairman said the agreement would be defeated by the US Senate. In 2001, GCC's executive director compared the Kyoto Protocol to the \"RMS Titanic\".\n\nGCC's challenge to science prompted a backlash from environmental groups. Environmentalists described GCC as a \"club for polluters\" and called for members to withdraw their support. \"Abandonment of the Global Climate Coalition by leading companies is partly in response to the mounting evidence that the world is indeed getting warmer,\" according to environmentalist Lester R. Brown. In 1998, Green Party delegates to the European Parliament introduced an unsuccessful proposal that the World Meteorological Organization name hurricanes after GCC members. Defections weakened the coalition. In 1996, British Petroleum resigned and later announced support for the Kyoto Protocol and commitment to greenhouse gas emission reductions. In 1997, Royal Dutch Shell withdrew after criticism from European environmental groups. In 1999, Ford Motor Company was the first US company to withdraw; the \"New York Times\" described the departure as \"the latest sign of divisions within heavy industry over how to respond to global warming.\" DuPont left the coalition in 1997 and Shell Oil (US) left in 1998. In 2000, GCC corporate members were the targets of a national student-run university divestiture campaign. Between December, 1999 and early March, 2000, Texaco, the Southern Company, General Motors and Daimler-Chrysler withdrew. Some former coalition members joined the Business Environmental Leadership Council within the Pew Center on Global Climate Change which represented diverse stakeholders, including business interests, with a commitment to peer-reviewed scientific research and accepted the need for emissions restrictions to address climate change.\n\nIn 2000, GCC restructured as an association of trade associations; membership was limited to trade associations, and individual corporations were represented through their trade association. Brown called the restructuring \"a thinly veiled effort to conceal the real issue - the loss of so many key corporate members.\"\n\nIn 2001, after US President George W. Bush withdrew the US from the Kyoto process, GCC disbanded. Absent the participation of the US, the effectiveness of the Kyoto process was limited. GCC said on its website that its mission had been successfully achieved, writing \"At this point, both Congress and the Administration agree that the U.S. should not accept the mandatory cuts in emissions required by the protocol.\"\n\nIn 2015, the Union of Concerned Scientists compared GCC's role in the public policy debate on climate change to the roles in the public policy debate on tobacco safety of the Tobacco Institute, the tobacco industry's lobbyist group, and the Council for Tobacco Research, which promoted misleading science. Environmentalist Bill McKibben said that, by promoting doubt about the science, \"throughout the 1990s, even as other nations took action, the fossil fuel industry's Global Climate Coalition managed to make American journalists treat the accelerating warming as a he-said-she-said story.\" According to the \"Los Angeles Times\", GCC members integrated projections from climate models into their operational planning while publicly criticising the models.\n\n\n", "id": "13089", "title": "Global Climate Coalition"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13090", "text": "Gotham City\n\nGotham City ( ) or Gotham is a fictional city appearing in American comic books published by DC Comics, best known as the home of Batman. Batman's place of residence was first identified as Gotham City in \"Batman\" #4 (December 1940). The city is located in the Northeastern United States, in close proximity to Metropolis, with the majority of DC Comics references placing Gotham City specifically in New Jersey. Cities such as New York City and Chicago have also influenced the look and feel of Gotham over the years.\n\nWithin the DC Extended Universe, the 2016 film \"Suicide Squad\" reveals Gotham City to be located in New Jersey. Locations used as inspiration or filming locations for the urban portion of Gotham City in the live-action \"Batman\" films have included Chicago, Detroit, Pittsburgh, Los Angeles, New Jersey, and New York City.\n\nWriter Bill Finger, on the naming of the city and the reason for changing Batman's locale from New York City to a fictional city, said, \"Originally I was going to call Gotham City 'Civic City.' Then I tried 'Capital City,' then 'Coast City.' Then I flipped through the New York City phone book and spotted the name 'Gotham Jewelers' and said, 'That's it,' Gotham City. We didn't call it New York because we wanted anybody in any city to identify with it.\"\n\n\"Gotham\" had long been a well-known nickname for New York City even prior to Batman's 1939 introduction. The nickname became popular in the nineteenth century; Washington Irving had first attached it to New York in the November 11, 1807 edition of his \"Salmagundi\", a periodical which lampooned New York culture and politics. Irving took the name from the village of Gotham, Nottinghamshire, England, a place inhabited, according to folklore, by fools. The village's name derives from Old English \"gāt\" 'goat' and \"hām\" 'home', literally \"homestead where goats are kept\", and is pronounced , like the word \"goat\" (cf. \"Chatham\", , a similar name where the letters \"th\" represent a \"t\" sound followed by a silent \"h\" rather than a \"th\" sound). The Joker references this etymology in \"Detective Comics\" #880, in which he tells Batman that the word means \"a safe place for goats\". In contrast, \"Gotham\" as used for New York has a different pronunciation by analogy to other words spelled with \"th\" and is pronounced as ,\nlike the word \"Goth\".\n\nGotham City's geography, like other fictional cities' geographies in the DC Universe, has varied over the decades, because of changing writers, editors, and storylines, but the majority of appearances make references to Gotham City being in the state of New Jersey. The 1990 \"Atlas of the DC Universe\" states that Gotham is located in New Jersey, across the Delaware Bay from Metropolis.\nIn \"Amazing World of DC Comics\" (March 1974) #14, publisher Mark Gruenwald discusses the history of the Justice League and indicates that Gotham City is located somewhere in the state of New Jersey.\n\nIn the \"World’s Greatest Super Heroes\" (August 1978) comic strip, a map is shown placing Gotham City in New Jersey and Metropolis in Delaware, and \"World's Finest Comics\" #259 (November 1979) confirms Gotham as being in New Jersey. \"New Adventures of Superboy\" #22 (October 1981) also shows a map with Gotham City in New Jersey and Metropolis across the bay.\n\nDetective Comics #503 (June 1983) includes several references suggesting Gotham City is in New Jersey. A location on the Jersey Shore is described as \"twenty miles north of Gotham\", and Robin and Batgirl drive from a \"secret New Jersey airfield\" to Gotham City and then drive on the \"Hudson County Highway.\" Hudson County is the name of an actual county in New Jersey.\n\n\"Batman: Shadow of the Bat\", Annual #1 (June 1993) establishes that Gotham City is in New Jersey. Sal E. Jordan's driver's license in the comic reveals his address is \"72 Faxcol Dr Gotham City, NJ 12345\".\n\nGotham City is frequently depicted to be within driving distance of Metropolis, the home of Superman. The distance between Gotham and Metropolis has varied greatly over the years, with depictions of the two ranging from being hundreds of miles apart to Gotham and Metropolis being shown as twin cities on opposite sides of Delaware Bay, with Gotham City in New Jersey and Metropolis in Delaware.\n\nDuring the Bronze Age of Comic Books, the Metro-Narrows Bridge was depicted as the main route connecting the twin cities of Metropolis and Gotham City. It has been described as being the longest suspension bridge in the world.\n\nA map appeared in \"The New Adventures of Superboy\" #22 (October 1981), that showed Smallville within driving distance of both Metropolis and Gotham City (Smallville was officially relocated to Kansas in post-Crisis comics).\n\nHowever, the exact location of the two cities has varied. A map of the United States in the Secret Files & Origins Guide to the DC Universe 2000 #1 depicts Metropolis and Gotham City (alongside Blüdhaven) as being somewhere in the Tri-state Area.\n\n\"The Atlas of the DC Universe\" from the 1990s places Metropolis in Delaware and Gotham City in New Jersey.\n\nIn \"Swamp Thing\" #53, Alan Moore wrote a fictional history for Gotham City that other writers have generally followed. According to Moore's tale, a Norwegian mercenary, Captain Jon Logerquist, founded Gotham City in 1635 and the British later took it over—a story that parallels the founding of New York by the Dutch (as New Amsterdam) and later takeover by the British. During the American Revolutionary War, Gotham City was the site of a major battle (paralleling the Battle of Brooklyn in the American Revolution). This was detailed in Rick Veitch's \"Swamp Thing\" #85 featuring Tomahawk. Rumors held it to be the site of various occult rites.\nThe 2011 comic book series \"\" details a history of Gotham City in which Alan Wayne (Bruce Wayne's ancestor), Theodore Cobblepot (Oswald Cobblepot's ancestor), and Edward Elliot (Thomas Elliot ancestor's), are considered the founding fathers of Gotham. In 1881 they constructed three bridges called the Gates of Gotham, each bearing one of their last names. Edward Elliot became increasingly jealous of the Wayne family’s popularity and wealth during this time period, a jealousy that would spread to his great-great grandson, Thomas Elliot or Hush.\n\nThe occult origins of Gotham are further delved into by Peter Milligan's 1990 story arc \"Dark Knight, Dark City\", which reveals that some of the American Founding Fathers are involved in summoning a bat-demon which becomes trapped beneath old \"Gotham Town\", its dark influence spreading as Gotham City evolves. A similar trend is followed in 2005's \"Shadowpact\" #5 by Bill Willingham, which expands upon Gotham's occult heritage by revealing a being who has slept for 40,000 years beneath the land upon which Gotham City was built. Strega, the being's servant, says that the \"dark and often cursed character\" of the city was influenced by the being who now uses the name \"Doctor Gotham.\"\n\nDuring the American Civil War, it was defended by an ancestor of the Penguin, fighting for the Union Army, Col. Nathan Cobblepot, in the Legendary Battle of Gotham Heights. In \"Gotham Underground\" #2 by Frank Tieri, Tobias Whale claims that 19th century Gotham was run by five rival gangs, until the first \"masks\" appeared, eventually forming a gang of their own. It is not clear whether these were vigilantes or costumed criminals.\n\nMany storylines have added more events to Gotham's history, at the same time greatly affecting the city and its people. Perhaps the greatest in effect was a long set of serial storylines, which started with Ra's al Ghul releasing a debilitating virus called the \"Clench\" during the \"\" storyline. As that arc concluded, the city was beginning to recover, only to suffer an earthquake measuring 7.6 on the Richter Scale in the 1998 \"\" storyline. This resulted in the federal government cutting Gotham off from the rest of the United States in the 1999 storyline \"No Man's Land\".\n\nIn terms of atmosphere, \"Batman\" writer and editor Dennis O'Neil has said that, figuratively, Batman's Gotham City is akin to \"Manhattan below Fourteenth Street at eleven minutes past midnight on the coldest night in November.\" Batman artist Neal Adams has long believed that Chicago, with its proliferation of mobsters in the 1940s, was the basis for Gotham, commenting, \"Chicago has had a reputation for a certain kind of criminality,\" says Adams, who lives in New York. \"Batman is in this kind of corrupt city and trying to turn it back into a better place. One of the things about Chicago is Chicago has alleys (which are virtually nonexistent in New York). Back alleys, that's where Batman fights all the bad guys.\" The statement \"Metropolis is New York in the daytime; Gotham City is New York at night\" has been variously attributed to comics creators Frank Miller and John Byrne\n\nStone gargoyles are commonly depicted on the buildings of Gotham City, such as the thirteen gargoyles on Wayne Tower. Various artists have depicted Batman perched atop gargoyles while keeping watch over Gotham City.\n\nIn designing the award-winning \"\", creators Bruce Timm and Eric Radomski emulated the Tim Burton films' \"otherworldly timelessness,\" incorporating period features such as black-and-white title cards, police airships (although no such thing existed, Timm has stated that he found it to fit the show's style) and a \"vintage\" color scheme with film noir flourishes. Police airships have since been incorporated into Batman comic books and are a recurring element in Gotham City.\n\nGotham City's atmosphere took on a lighter tone in the comics of the 1950s and part of the 1960s, similar to the tone of \"Batman\" stories of that era. However, by the early 1970s, particularly with Dennis O'Neil becoming a prominent \"Batman\" writer, the tone of the city, along with that of the stories, had become grittier. (Significantly, by the 1970s, Gotham's real-life counterpart, New York, had lost much of its 1960s \"Fun City\" luster and was beset by urban problems including public fear of rising crime, a declining economy, police corruption and municipal financial mismanagement). In most stories since the 70s, the portrayal of Gotham is that of a dark and foreboding metropolis rife with crime, grime, corruption, and a deep-seated sense of urban decay.\n\nDuring his run as a writer, \"Batman\" scribe Grant Morrison brought about a more optimistic interpretation of Gotham City. As Morrison stated: \"If Gotham was so bloody awful, no one normal would live there and there'd be no one to protect from criminals. If Gotham really was an open sewer of crime and corruption, every story set there would serve to demonstrate the complete and utter failure of Batman's mission, which isn't really the message we want to send, is it? You've got Batman and all his allies as well as Commissioner Gordon and the city still exudes a vile miasma of darkness and death? I can't buy that. It's simply not realistic and flies in the face of in-story logic (and you know I like my comics realistic!) so my artists and I have taken a different tack and we want to show the cool, vibrant side of Gotham, the energy and excitement that would draw people to live and visit there.\"\n\nChristopher Nolan, who once lived in Chicago, effected a depiction of Gotham that featured distinct Chicago architecture. \"Batman Begins\" features a CGI augmented version of Chicago while \"The Dark Knight\" more directly features Chicago infrastructure and architecture such as Navy Pier: however, \"The Dark Knight Rises\" abandoned Chicago, instead shooting in Pittsburgh, Los Angeles, New York City, Newark, New Jersey, London and Glasgow.\n\nWithin the \"Batman\" comics, the person cited as being influential in promoting the unique architecture of Gotham City during the pre-American Civil War era was Judge Solomon Wayne, Bruce Wayne's ancestor. His campaign to reform Gotham came to a head when he met a young architect named Cyrus Pinkney. Wayne commissioned Pinkney to design and to build the first \"Gotham Style\" structures in what became the center of the city's financial district. The \"Gotham Style\" idea of the writers matches parts of the Gothic Revival in style and timing. In the storyline the Gotham Cathedral plays a central role for the story as it is built by Mr. Whisper. Whisper is man who has sold his soul to the devil. Mr. Whisper is the antagonist in the story. In a 1992 storyline, a man obsessed with Pinkney's architecture blew up several Gotham buildings in order to reveal the Pinkney structures they had hidden; the editorial purpose behind this was to transform the city depicted in the comics to resemble the designs created by Anton Furst for the 1989 \"Batman\" film.\nAlan Wayne expanded upon his father's ideas and built a bridge to expand the city. Edward Elliot and Theodore Cobblepot also each had a bridge named for them.\n\n\"\" mentions the \"Sprang Act\", which forbids Gothamite businesses from advertising on rooftops. It was passed after minor villain Humpty Dumpty over-wound the mainspring of the city hall clock, causing the hour hand to jump off and knock one of the billboards down, causing a chain reaction.\n\nA common theme in stories set in Gotham is the rampant and recurring corruption within the city's civil authorities and infrastructure, most notably within the Gotham City Police Department. During stories set early in Batman's career (most notably \"\"), Commissioner Gillian B. Loeb was depicted as having his hands in many pockets. However, Batman found evidence for conspiracy charges, forcing Loeb to resign his position. Later stories depicted subsequent commissioners as also being corruptible, or open to various forms of influence. In other stories, Batman has had to take on crooked cops, either acting in collusion with supervillains, working for the mob, or on their own. Later stories, featuring James Gordon as the new Commissioner, show the two characters often uniting to purge corruption from the force. Gordon was the commissioner for about 9 to 10 years of continuity, then retired, handing the police force over to his replacement, Commissioner Akins. Recent stories have returned Gordon to the position of Commissioner, unfortunately to find corruption taking a greater hold since his departure. Corruption escalates during \"Batman Eternal\" when Gordon is framed for causing a major train accident and a new commissioner is appointed with ties to the old gangs, but Batman and his allies are eventually able to replace him with their ally Jason Bard, only for Bard to resign when he is revealed to have been working with Hush to destroy Batman. During Bruce Wayne's temporary 'retirement' after he was left with amnesia following his last battle with the Joker, the police department even created their own Batman using various donated technology, with Gordon acting as the GCPD's official Batman, but he returned to his old role in the department after the true Batman returned. In the 1966 television series, \"Batman\", the Gotham City police force was not a focus of the stories.\n\n\nThe various comic book series of the Batman family of books are set in Gotham, and feature characters such as Nightwing, Huntress, Black Canary, Barbara Gordon and Batwoman.\n\nBruce Wayne does not live in the city itself and is depicted as living just outside of Gotham City in Wayne Manor.\n\nOther DC characters have also been depicted to be living in Gotham, such as mercenary Tommy Monaghan and renowned demonologist Jason Blood.\nWithin modern DC Universe continuity, Batman is not the first hero in Gotham. Stories featuring Alan Scott, the Golden Age Green Lantern, set before and during World War II depict Scott living in Gotham, and later depictions show him running his Gotham Broadcasting Corporation.\n\nDC's 2011 reboot of \"All Star Western\" takes place in an Old West-styled Gotham. Jonah Hex and Amadeus Arkham are among this version of Gotham's inhabitants.\n\nApart from Gotham's superhero residents, the residents of the city feature in a back-up series in \"Detective Comics\" called \"Tales of Gotham City\" and in two limited series called \"Gotham Nights\". Additionally, the Gotham City Police Department is the focus of the series \"Gotham Central\", as well as the mini-series \"Gordon's Law\", \"Bullock's Law\", and \"\".\n\nSeveral mayors of Gotham have appeared in the comic book series that collectively form the Batman Family of titles:\nGotham City is a major economic center within the United States of the DC Universe. Its important industries include manufacturing; shipping; finance; fine arts, represented by its numerous museums, galleries, and jewelers; and the production of giant novelty props. In addition to its commercial seaport, it also supports a naval shipyard.\n\nOtisburg is the district in Gotham that runs straight through the northern segment of the island and connects to Gotham County on the mainland.\n\nBurnley is the district that runs at center of Gotham.\n\nThe East End is an underdeveloped part of Gotham laden with poverty, crime, prostitution, and the circulation of illegal drugs and weapons. Catwoman takes an active interest in protecting this area.\n\nOld Gotham is the district more well known for the location of Oracle's Clock Tower and the GCPD headquarters.\n\nThe Diamond District is a district of Gotham that is home to the city's wealthiest citizens.\n\nRobinson Park is the city's main park. During \"No Man's Land\", Poison Ivy claimed this area as her own.\n\nChinatown is a district that is home to a solid and traditional Chinese community. Known for its restaurants and oriental markets, Chinatown residents seem to consider themselves a self-contained community and neither ask for nor feel that they require assistance from \"outsiders\". The district's main street could be accessed through an ornate golden gateway on Gate Street.\n\n\nWayne Manor is the mansion estate of Bruce Wayne and is most commonly depicted as being just outside of Gotham City. The Batcave is located beneath Wayne Manor. It is also known as Wayne Mansion and Stately Wayne Manor.\n\n\"Batman\" (1989), the look of Gotham was designed by production designer Anton Furst, who won an Oscar for his work on the film. Wayne Manor's exteriors utilized Knebworth House, a Gothicised Tudor, while its interiors were Hatfield House in Hatfield. The Axis Chemical Works, where Jack Napier (Jack Nicholson) plunges into the chemical sludge, was filmed at a disused power station in Acton Lane, West London. The exploding exterior was Little Barford Power Station, a couple of miles south of St Neots in Cambridgeshire. Tim Burton's sequel, \"Batman Returns\" (1992), filmed city scenes entirely on soundstages. Production designer Bo Welch, who took over from Furst, based his designs on Furst's concepts.\nWhen Joel Schumacher took over directing the \"Batman\" film series from Tim Burton, Barbara Ling handled the production design for both of Schumacher's films \"Batman Forever\" (1995) and 1997's \"Batman & Robin\" Ling's vision of Gotham City was a luminous and outlandish evocation of Modern expressionism and Constructivism. Its futuristic-like concepts (to a certain extent, akin to the 1982 film \"Blade Runner\") appeared to be sort of a cross between Manhattan and the \"Neo-Tokyo\" of \"Akira\". Ling admitted her influences for the Gotham City design came from \"neon-ridden Tokyo and the Machine Age. Gotham is like a World's Fair on ecstasy.\" When Batman is pursuing Two-Face in \"Batman Forever,\" the chase ends at Lady Gotham, the fictional equivalent of the Statue of Liberty. During Mr. Freeze’s attempt to freeze Gotham in the film \"Batman & Robin\", the targeting screen for his giant laser locates it somewhere on the New England shoreline, possibly as far north as Maine. The soundtrack for \"Batman & Robin\" features a song named after the city and sung by R. Kelly, later included on international editions of his 1998 double album \"R.\"\n\nChristopher Nolan has stated that Chicago is the basis of his portrayal of Gotham, and the majority of both \"Batman Begins\" (2005) and \"The Dark Knight\" (2008) were filmed there. However, the city itself seems to take many cues from New York City: police cars use a paint job that was used by the NYPD in the 1990s, and the same is applicable to garbage trucks, and the \"Gotham Post\" seems to have the same font heading as \"The New York Post\".\n\nIn \"Batman Begins\", the art deco Chicago Board of Trade Building was used for the film's Wayne Tower, which in the film, was also as the hub of Gotham's water and elevated railway systems. Garrick Theatre stood in as Gotham's opera house. 35 East Wacker was used as the Gotham courthouse. Mentmore Towers in Buckinghamshire was used to portray Wayne Manor. Nolan desired that Gotham appeared as a large, modern city that nonetheless reflected a variety of architecture styles and periods, as well as different socioeconomic strata. The production's approach depicted Gotham as an exaggeration of New York, with elements taken from Chicago, the elevated freeways and monorails of Tokyo, and the \"walled city of Kalhoon\" in Hong Kong, which was the basis for the slum in the film known as The Narrows.\n\nIn the animated \"\" (2008), which takes place between \"Batman Begins\" and \"The Dark Knight\", The Narrows was converted into an expansion of Arkham Asylum.\n\nIn \"The Dark Knight\", Wayne Enterprises, previously depicted as the Chicago Board of Trade Building, was now the Richard J. Daley Center. As Wayne Manor was being reconstructed during the events of \"The Dark Knight\", a digitally enhanced Hfront 71 was used as Bruce Wayne's penthouse. 330 North Wabash was used as Gotham City Hall and houses Mayor Garcia's office and Harvey Dent's office. The climax of the movie on the Prewitt Building uses the then-under-construction Trump Tower. Other Chicago landmarks seen in \"The Dark Knight\" include the Marina City towers, Willis Tower, Navy Pier, the Randolph Street Metra Station, and 111 East Wacker Drive. It is revealed that downtown Gotham, or much of the city, is on an island, similar to New York City's Manhattan Island, as suggested by the \"Gotham Island Ferry\". However, while Gordon is discussing evacuation plans with the Mayor, \"land routes to the east\" are mentioned. In conversation with Harvey Dent, Bruce Wayne indicates that the Palisades of the Wayne Manor estate are within the city limits. In terms of population, Lucius Fox says that the city houses \"30 million people\". The film indicates that the city's area code is 735, which in real life is an unused code. Compared to the previous film, less CGI was used in Gotham's skyline.\n\nFor \"The Dark Knight Rises\" (2012), the production utilized Pittsburgh, Los Angeles, New York City, Newark, New Jersey, London and Glasgow for shots of Gotham City.\n\nWithin the DC Extended Universe, Gotham City is located in Gotham County, New Jersey. In \"\", paperwork mentions that the city is in \"Gotham County\", and Amanda Waller's files on Deadshot and Harley Quinn in \"Suicide Squad\" reveal Gotham City to be located in the state of New Jersey.\n\nZack Snyder confirmed that Metropolis and Gotham City are in close geographical proximity to each other, with Gotham City being located on the edge of the New Jersey, separated from the federal district of Metropolis by Delaware Bay. Senator Debbie Stabenow makes a cameo appearance in \"\" as the state's governor.\n\nThe \"Boston Globe\" compared the close proximity of Gotham and Metropolis to Jersey City, New Jersey and Manhattan, New York. A television spot for Turkish Airlines premiering during the 2016 Super Bowl featured Bruce Wayne (played by the film's star, Ben Affleck) promoting Gotham as a tourist destination.\n\n\nGotham City is featured in \"\". In the episode \"\", a driver's license lists a Gotham area resident's hometown as \"Gotham Estates, NY\". In the episode , when Bruce Wayne leaves for England, a map shows Gotham City, at the joining of Long Island and the Hudson River, the real-life location of New York City. The episode , however, implies that Gotham resides in a state of the same name; a prison workshop is shown stamping license plates that read \"Gotham: The Dark Deco State\" (as a reference to the artistic style of the series). Also, in the episode it is seen on a character's address in a police file that Gotham city is located in New York state. In addition, the episode \"\" states that Gotham City has a population of approximately 10 million people.\n\nDuring the events of the direct-to-video film, \"\" (1998), a computer screen displaying Barbara Gordon's personal information refers to her location as \"Gotham City, NY\", and also displays her area code as being 212 - a Manhattan area code.\n\n\"Batman Beyond\" (1999-2001) envisions a Gotham City in 2039, referred to as \"Neo-Gotham\".\n\n\n\"\" (2009) opens with Batman driving Joker from Gotham City to Arkham Asylum. Joker also threatens to detonate bombs across Gotham. In \"\" (2011), the slums of Old Gotham City (the northern island) were converted into Arkham City. Inside the prison walls, this part of Gotham contains various landmarks throughout the story, like Penguin's Iceberg Lounge, the Ace Chemical Plant, the Sionis Steel Mill, the Old Gotham City Police Department building, and the Monarch Theatre with the Wayne murder scene in Crime Alley. Most of these locations have major events in the story. In \"\" (2013), an earlier, younger version of the city can be seen than that of other games in the \"Batman: Arkham\" series. In addition to the northern island, this installment in the series lets players explore a new southern island, connected to the former by the Pioneer's Bridge. In \"\" (2015), the Central Gotham City is five-times larger than Old Gotham.\n\n", "id": "13090", "title": "Gotham City"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13092", "text": "Charles Goren\n\nCharles Henry Goren (March 4, 1901 – April 3, 1991) was an American bridge player and writer who significantly developed and popularized the game. He was the leading American bridge personality in the 1950s and 1960s – or 1940s and 1950s, as \"Mr. Bridge\" – as Ely Culbertson had been in the 1930s. Culbertson, Goren, and Harold Vanderbilt were the three people named when \"The Bridge World\" inaugurated a bridge \"hall of fame\" in 1964 and they were made founding members of the ACBL Hall of Fame in 1995.\n\nAccording to \"New York Times\" bridge columnist Alan Truscott, more than 10 million copies of Goren's books were sold. Among them, \"Point-Count Bidding\" (1949) \"pushed the great mass of bridge players into abandoning Ely Culbertson's clumsy and inaccurate honor-trick method of valuation.\"\n\nGoren was born in Chotin, Maldova, and was moved to Philadelphia with his father and brother, Jacob and Edward, at age 3. Born to Russian Jewish immigrants. He earned a law degree at McGill University in Montreal. While he was attending McGill, a girlfriend (or \"a young hostess\") laughed at his ineptness at the game of bridge, motivating him to immerse himself in a study of existing bridge materials. (The young hostess laughed in 1922. The game was auction bridge, \"which became contract bridge later in the decade\".)\n\nWhen he graduated, he was admitted to the Pennsylvania bar and he practiced law for 13 years in Philadelphia. The growing fame of Ely Culbertson, however, prompted Goren to abandon his original career choice to pursue bridge competitions, where he attracted the attention of Milton Work. Work hired Goren to help with his bridge articles and columns, and eventually Goren began ghostwriting Work's material.\n\nWork was one of numerous strong bridge players based in Philadelphia around the 1920s. He became an extraordinarily successful lecturer and writer on the game and perhaps the first who came to be called its \"Grand Old Man\". From 1923, the same year Goren graduated from law school, he had popularized the 4–3–2–1 point count system for evaluating balanced hands (now sometimes called the Work count, Work point count, or Work points). His chief assistant Olive Peterson and young Goren established a partnership as players.\n\nWork was the greatest authority on auction bridge, which was generally replaced by contract bridge during the late 1920s. Goren \"became Mr. Work's technical assistant at the end of the decade\".\n\nAs a player Goren's \"breakthrough\" was the 1937 Board-a-Match Teams championship (now Reisinger) won with three other Philadelphia players: John Crawford, Charles Solomon, and Sally Young.\n\nHis breakthrough as a writer may have been when Culbertson moved a newspaper bridge column from one syndicate to another. The \"Chicago Tribune\" and the \"Daily News\" of New York picked up Goren. \n\nAfter Milton Work died in 1934, Goren began his own bridge writing career and published the first of his many books on playing bridge, \"Winning Bridge Made Easy\", in 1936. Drawing on his experience with Work's system, Goren quickly became popular as an instructor and lecturer. His subsequent lifetime of contributions to the game have made him one of the most important figures in the history of bridge.\n\nGoren became world champion at the Bermuda Bowl in 1950. Goren's books have sold millions of copies (especially \"Winning Bridge Made Easy\" and \"Contract Bridge Complete\"); by 1958 his daily bridge column was appearing in 194 American newspapers. He also had a monthly column in \"McCall's\" and a weekly column in \"Sports Illustrated\".\n\nHis television program, \"Championship Bridge with Charles Goren\", was broadcast from 1959 to 1964 on the ABC network. It featured numerous appearances by top players and segments with celebrity guests such as Chico Marx, Alfred Drake, and Forest Evashevski, among others.\n\nGoren's longest partnership was with Helen Sobel, but he also famously partnered actor Omar Sharif. Sharif also wrote introductions to or co-authored several of Goren's bridge books, and was also co-author of Goren's newspaper column, eventually taking it over in collaboration with Tannah Hirsch.\n\nAs he continued writing, Goren began to develop his point count system, based on the Milton Work point count, as an improvement over the existing system of counting \"honor tricks\". Goren, with assistance, formulated a method of combining the Work count, which was based entirely on high cards, and various distributional features. This may well have improved the bidding of intermediate players and beginners almost immediately.\n\nGoren also worked to continue the practice of opening four-card suits, with an occasional three-card club suit when the only four-card suit was a weak . In this, he was following the practice established by Ely Culbertson in the early 1930s. Later on, he continued this practice, resisting the well-known \"five-card majors\" approach that has become a major feature of modern Standard American bidding.\n\nOpening a four-card suit can improve the chances of the partnership identifying a four-four trump fit, and the four-card approach is still used by experts today, notably by most Acol players. It is claimed that the drawback of the four-card approach is that the Law of Total Tricks is more difficult to apply in cases where it is used. However, the five-card majors approach became popular before the Law of Total Tricks was propounded.\n\nIn addition to his pioneering work in bringing simple and effective bridge to everyday players, Goren also worked to popularize the Precision bidding method, which is one of many so-called big club or strong club systems (which use an opening bid of one club to indicate a strong hand).\n\nTribune Content Agency distributes the daily column Goren Bridge, written by Bob Jones, using the Goren method.\n\nGoren died on April 3, 1991, in Encino, California, at the age of 90. He had lived with his nephew Marvin Goren for 19 years. While few players \"play Goren\" exactly today, the point-count approach he popularized remains the foundation for most bidding systems.\n\nDuring the month of Goren's death, Truscott followed his obituary with a bridge column entitled, \"Goren leaves behind many fans and a column with an international flavor\". His business interests had been \"managed by others\" since his retirement \"a quarter of a century ago\", according to Truscott. \"The Goren syndicated column now has an international flavor: It carries the bylines of the movie star Omar Sharif, an Egyptian who lives in Paris, and an entrepreneur, Tannah Hirsch, a South African who came to the United States via Israel.\"\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\nCitations\n\n", "id": "13092", "title": "Charles Goren"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13095", "text": "Galactus\n\nGalactus is a fictional character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. Formerly a mortal man, Galactus is a cosmic entity who originally consumed planets to sustain his life force, and serves a functional role in the upkeep of the primary Marvel continuity. Galactus was created by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby and first appeared in the comic book \"Fantastic Four\" #48, published in March 1966.\n\nLee and Kirby had desired to introduce a character that broke away from the archetype of the standard villain, culminating in the creation of Galactus. In the character's first appearance in \"The Fantastic Four\", Galactus was depicted as a god-like figure who feeds by draining living planets of their energy, and operates without regard to the morality and judgements of mortal beings. Galactus' initial origin was that of a space explorer named Galan who gained cosmic abilities by passing near a star, but writer Mark Gruenwald further developed the origin of the character, revealing that Galan lived during the previous universe. As Galan's universe came to an end, Galan merged with the \"Sentience of the Universe\" to become Galactus, an entity that wielded such cosmic power as to require devouring entire planets to sustain his existence. Additional material written by John Byrne, Jim Starlin, and Louise Simonson explored Galactus' role and purpose in the Marvel Universe, and examined the actions of the character through themes of genocide, manifest destiny, ethics, and natural/necessary existence. Frequently accompanied by a herald (such as the Silver Surfer), the character has appeared as both antagonist and protagonist in central and supporting roles. Since debuting in the Silver Age of Comic Books, Galactus has played a role in over five decades of Marvel continuity.\n\nThe character has been featured in other Marvel media, such as arcade games, video games, animated television series, and the 2007 film \"\".\n\nCreated by writer-editor Stan Lee and artist-coplotter Jack Kirby, the character debuted in \"The Fantastic Four\" #48 (March 1966, the first of a three-issue story later known as \"The Galactus Trilogy\").\n\nIn 1966, nearly five years after launching Marvel Comics' flagship superhero title, \"Fantastic Four\", creators Stan Lee and Jack Kirby collaborated on an antagonist designed to break the supervillain mold of the time with god-like stature and power. As Lee recalled in 1993,\nKirby described his Biblical inspirations for Galactus and an accompanying character, an angelic herald Lee called the Silver Surfer:\nKirby elaborated, \"Galactus in actuality is a sort of god. He is beyond reproach, beyond anyone's opinion. In a way he is kind of a Zeus, who fathered Hercules. He is his own legend, and of course, he and the Silver Surfer are sort of modern legends, and they are designed that way.\"\n\nWriter Mike Conroy expanded on Lee and Kirby's explanation: \"In five short years from the launch of the \"Fantastic Four\", the Lee/Kirby duo...had introduced a whole host of alien races or their representatives...there were the Skrulls, the Watcher and the Stranger, all of whom Lee and Kirby used in the foundations of the universe they were constructing, one where all things were possible but only if they did not flout the 'natural laws' of this cosmology. In the nascent Marvel Universe, characters acted consistently, whatever comic they were appearing in. Their actions reverberated through every title. It was pure soap opera but on a cosmic scale, and Galactus epitomized its epic sweep.\"\n\nThis led to the introduction of Galactus in \"Fantastic Four\" #48–50 (March–May 1966), which fans began calling \"The Galactus Trilogy\". Kirby did not intend Galactus to reappear, to preserve the character's awe-inspiring presence. Fan popularity, however, prompted Lee to ask Kirby for Galactus's reappearance, and the character became a mainstay of the Marvel Universe.\nIn order to preserve Galactus's mystique, his next two appearances were nonspeaking cameos in \"Thor\" #134 (November 1966), and \"Daredevil\" #37 (February 1968). Numerous requests from fans prompted the character to be featured heavily in \"Fantastic Four\" #72–77 (March–August 1968). After a flashback appearance in \"Silver Surfer\" #1 (August 1968), the character returned to Earth in \"Thor\" #160–162 (January–March 1969). Galactus's origin was revealed in \"Thor\" #168–169 (September–October 1969).\n\nThe character made appearances in \"Fantastic Four\" #120–123 (March–June 1972) and \"Thor\" #225–228 (July–October 1974). These two storylines introduced two new heralds for Galactus. Galactus also featured in \"Fantastic Four\" #172–175 (July–October 1976) and #206–213 (May–December 1979).\n\nStan Lee and Jack Kirby reunited for the origin of Silver Surfer and Galactus in the one-shot graphic novel \"The Silver Surfer, The Ultimate Cosmic Experience!\" in 1978. This Marvel Fireside Book, published by Simon & Schuster, was an out-of-continuity retelling of the origin story without the Fantastic Four.\n\nThe full Lee-and-Kirby origin story was reprinted in the one-volume \"Super-Villain Classics: Galactus the Origin\" #1 (May 1983), inked by Vince Colletta and George Klein, lettered by John Morelli and colored by Andy Yanchus. While nearly identical to the previous origin, this story featured supplemental material, edits, and deletions by writer Mark Gruenwald, pencillers John Byrne and Ron Wilson and inker Jack Abel. Rather than traveling into a dying star, the character enters the core of the collapsing universe before the Big Bang; the story was later reprinted as \"Origin of Galactus\" #1 (February 1996).\n\nThe character guest-starred in \"Rom\" #26–27 (January–February 1982). Galactus featured in two related storylines of \"Fantastic Four\" #242–244 (May–July 1982) and #257 (August 1983). Another appearance in \"Fantastic Four\" #262 (January 1984) sparked controversy. At the end of the story, Eternity, an abstract entity in the Marvel Universe, appears to validate the existence of Galactus; Howard University professor of literature Marc Singer criticized this, accusing writer-artist John Byrne of using the character to \"justify planetary-scale genocide.\" Byrne and Stan Lee also collaborated on a one-shot Silver Surfer story (June 1982) in which it's revealed that after the Surfer's rebellion against Galactus, the planet eater returned to Zenn-La, the Surfer's homeworld, and drained it of energy after allowing the populace to flee.\n\nWriter-penciller John Byrne and inker Terry Austin produced \"The Last Galactus Story\" as a serial in the anthology comic-magazine \"Epic Illustrated\" #26–34 (October 1984–February 1986). Nine of a scheduled ten installments appeared. Each ran six pages, except part eight (which ran 12). The magazine was canceled with issue #34, leaving the last chapter unpublished and the story unfinished; however, Byrne later published the conclusion on his website. Galactus played a pivotal role in the limited series \"Secret Wars\" #1–12 (May 1984 – April 1985), and became a recurring character in the third volume of the \"Silver Surfer\" (beginning with issue #1, July 1987).\n\nArtist John Buscema of the original Silver Surfer series produced a 64-page hardcover comic made all of full-page splash panels that Stan Lee scripted. It was published in October 1988 as \"Silver Surfer: Judgment Day\". In it, Mephisto kidnaps two of Galactus's heralds, the Silver Surfer and Nova. Galactus himself invades Mephisto's realm to reclaim them. The cosmic battle between Mephisto and Galactus ends when the latter starts to absorb the life energy of Mephisto's \"brimstone world\", forcing the lord of evil to concede.\n\nGalactus was featured in the miniseries \"Infinity Gauntlet\" #1–6 (July – December 1991), \"Infinity War\" #1–6 (June – November 1992) and \"Cosmic Powers\" #1–6 (March – August 1994). The character starred in the six-issue miniseries \"Galactus the Devourer\" (September 1999 – March 2000), written by Louise Simonson and illustrated by John Buscema, which climaxed with Galactus's death. Simonson originally conceived that the story arc would occur in the third volume of \"Silver Surfer\", but the title was canceled due to dwindling sales. She proposed a separate limited series, and at the time was initially doubtful that Marvel would approve what she considered a \"radical\" idea concerning \"why the very existence of the universe depends on the health and well-being of Galactus.\"\n\nThe consequences of Galactus's death are explored in the \"Fantastic Four\" Annual 2001 and \"Fantastic Four\" #46–49 (October 2001 – January 2002), resulting in Galactus's revival. The character features in the first six issues of the series \"Thanos\" (December 2003 – May 2004), written by Jim Starlin. The story is noteworthy due to its evaluation of the standard justifications (Social Darwinism and divine right of kings) for the character (by defending the need for a social contract with the rest of the universe) and its search for alternate means to feed his hunger. Issues #7–12, written by Keith Giffen, introduce the first herald (the Fallen One).\n\nGalactus's origin is re-examined in \"Fantastic Four\" #520–523 (October 2004 – April 2005), where the character is temporarily reverted to his mortal form. After appearing in the limited series \"Stormbreaker: The Saga of Beta Ray Bill\" #1–6 (March–August 2005) Galactus was a central character in the \"Annihilation\" storyline, appearing in the limited series \"\" #1–4 (June–September 2006), \"Annihilation\" #1–6 (October 2006 – March 2007) and the epilogue, \"\" #1–2 (February–April 2007).\n\nGalactus was an antagonist in \"Fantastic Four\" #545–546 (June–July 2007), where he tried to devour fellow cosmic function Epoch. In \"Nova\" vol. 4, #13–15 (May–July 2008), the character had no dialogue. Author Andy Lanning said that he and co-writer Dan Abnett were \"treating Galactus like a force of nature; an inevitable, planetary catastrophe that there is no reasoning with, no bargaining with and no escaping.\" Galactus also appeared in the limited series \"Beta Ray Bill: Godhunter\" #1–3 (June–August 2009), a sequel to \"Stormbreaker: The Saga of Beta Ray Bill\".\n\nGalactus and the Silver Surfer appeared as antagonists in \"Skaar: Son of Hulk\" #9-11, and as protagonists in the limited series \"The Thanos Imperative\" (June–November 2010). Galactus was a member of the God Squad in the miniseries \"Chaos War\" #2–5 (December–March 2010). After an appearance in \"Fantastic Four\" #583–587 (November 2010 – March 2011), the character returned to Earth in \"Silver Surfer\" vol. 6, #1–5 (January–May 2011) and was the antagonist in \"The Mighty Thor\" #1–6 (April–September 2011).\n\nIn April 2015, Galactus made an appearance in issue 4 of the series \"The Unbeatable Squirrel Girl\" and issue 2 of the series \"Howard the Duck\".\n\nGalactus was originally the explorer Galan, from the planet Taa, which existed in the prime pre-Big Bang universe. When an unknown cosmic cataclysm gradually kills all other life in his universe, he and other survivors leave Taa on a spacecraft and are engulfed in the Big Crunch. Galan does not die, however; he is transformed by bonding with the Sentience of the Universe. He gestates for billions of years in the current universe which formed after the Big Bang, emerging as Galactus. A Watcher (Ecce) sees Galactus's emergence from his gestation vessel; although the Watcher recognizes his destructive nature, he chooses not to kill him. Fully awake, Galactus is so hungry that he consumes the nearby planet of Archeopia. This planet is the first of many, since Galactus must consume the life energy of whole planets for his sustenance. In memory of his dead home world, Taa, and the first planet to fall prey to his hunger, Galactus constructs a new \"home world\" (Taa II), which is actually a Möbius strip-shaped space station.\n\nGalactus later becomes involved in a civil war among the Proemial Gods, who came into being during the universe's infancy as the initial caretakers of cosmic consonance. After time, the Proemial Gods become self-aware, and a faction of the gods (led by Diableri of Chaos) attempt to remake the universe in their image, Galactus kills Diableri and imprisons three other rebel gods (Antiphon, Tenebrous, and Aegis) in the Kyln.\n\nGalactus is driven to create a being in his own image, who later becomes known as Tyrant. Tyrant rebels and after a battle that ravages entire galaxies, they part. Millennia later, Galactus decides to empower others as heralds to find worlds for him. Unhappy with his first herald, the Fallen One, he dismisses him and later accepts Norrin Radd's offer to become his herald as the Silver Surfer in exchange for sparing the planet Zenn-La.\n\nAfter making his way to Earth, Galactus is driven off by the Fantastic Four, Uatu the Watcher, and the rebellious Silver Surfer after The Human Torch—with the Watcher's assistance—retrieves the Ultimate Nullifier from Taa II. Galactus leaves Earth, vowing that he will never try to consume it again; however, he exiles the Silver Surfer there for betraying him. He later returns for his former herald, but the Surfer is unrepentant and chooses to remain on Earth. Thor sees Galactus when the entity is in conflict with Ego the Living Planet, and discovers his origin.\n\nReturning to Earth, Galactus again tries to re-enlist the Silver Surfer. The Fantastic Four and the Surfer defeat Galactus's new herald, Air-Walker; Mr. Fantastic reprograms Galactus's ship to travel to the Negative Zone, said to contain many uninhabited worlds that he could consume. Thor and Olympian ally Hercules see Galactus when his next herald, Firelord, travels to Earth to be free of his master. Galactus frees Firelord when Thor presents Galactus with the Asgardian Destroyer to animate and use as a herald.\n\nGalactus comes into conflict with the High Evolutionary when he tries to devour Counter-Earth, but he is transformed into harmless energy after attempting to devour the planet Poppup. Returning to his normal form, Galactus is sought by the Fantastic Four to help stop a new cosmic threat (the ). Mr. Fantastic offers to release Galactus from his vow to avoid Earth if he helps defeat the Sphinx. Galactus agrees, if the Fantastic Four recruit Terrax as a new herald. The heroes succeed, and the newly empowered Terrax leads his master to Earth. Galactus finds the Sphinx in Egypt, defeats him, and retreats when Mr. Fantastic threatens to use a fake Ultimate Nullifier while the Watcher, again interfering, prevents Galactus from reading Richards' mind.\n\nLater, believing that Terrax was trapped in a black hole, Galactus summoned the mutant known as Dazzler and empowered her to cosmic scale and temporarily made her into his herald, as he thought that Dazzler was one of the few beings in the universe that stood a chance of shedding light inside a black hole. Once inside the black hole, however, Dazzler found that Terrax was not trapped, but was actually hiding from his master. A fight started and, as Dazzler was still empowered by sound blasts that Galactus's ship kept firing inside the black hole, she was able to render Terrax unconscious. She returned the herald to his master and Galactus then went on with his usual business, forgetting about Dazzler. Only by glowing incredibly bright did she make her presence known and bring Galactus to return her to Earth.\n\nGalactus is later fooled by the Galadorian Spaceknight Rom into trying to devour the Black Nebula, home of the Dire Wraiths. The devourer is repelled by the Wraith Sun. Weakened, he pursues the rebellious Terrax to Earth and strips him of his power. Near death, Galactus is saved by the Fantastic Four and the Avengers and acquires another herald, Nova.\n\nHe destroys the Skrull homeworld, and discusses his role in the universe with fellow cosmic entity Death. Mr. Fantastic is captured for saving Galactus's life, and is tried by aliens who are remnants of races annihilated by Galactus's hunger. During the trial the cosmic entity Eternity—the sentient embodiment of space and reality of the Marvel Universe—intervenes, allowing all intelligent living beings present to momentarily become one with the universe, giving them the understand that Galactus is part of the cosmic order, despite the loss of whole races. After the encounter no one can remember why Galactus is necessary, but they know that he is.\n\nDuring the Secret Wars, Galactus tries to consume Battleworld in order to have his insatiable hunger taken away by the Beyonder but his plan is foiled by Dr. Doom. He grants clemency to the Surfer, who helps his former master against the Elders of the Universe and the In-Betweener's schemes. He also rescues the Silver Surfer and Nova from Mephisto's realm. Galactus helps the cosmic hierarchy in a war against the mutant Eternal Thanos, who had the Infinity Gauntlet.\n\nWhen Nova is conscience-stricken at causing the death of billions of aliens, Galactus takes on a new herald, the bloodthirsty Morg. Tyrant returns; despite capturing the Surfer, Morg and several other cosmic-powered aliens, he is thwarted by Thanos and destroyed when Morg uses the Ultimate Nullifier.\n\nGalactus decides, with help from a new herald Red Shift, to only devour the energy of living beings; this brings him into conflict with alien races and Earth's heroes. During a final confrontation near the home world of the Shi'ar, the Silver Surfer turns Galactus's siphoning machines on him. Galactus starves and dies, taking the form of a star.\n\nThe death of Galactus allows the entity (a metaphysical embodiment of destruction, and the antithesis of cosmic entity Eternity) to emerge from imprisonment. He wreaks havoc across thousands of alternate universes, killing every incarnation of Galactus that he encounters. Abraxas is thwarted when the children of Reed Richards, Franklin Richards and Valeria Von Doom, exhaust their powers to restore Galactus; Mr. Fantastic uses the Ultimate Nullifier to reset reality, preventing Abraxas's escape and destruction.\n\nConscience-stricken, Galactus tries to rid himself of his hunger by feeding on the power from the Infinity Gems but is tricked into releasing the Hunger, which feeds on entire universes. The creature's access is sealed, with Thanos's help.\n\nWhen an alien race develops a technology making planets invisible to Galactus, he empowers the Human Torch (who has traded powers with the Invisible Woman) as an unwilling herald to locate the planets. The Fantastic Four and Quasar are able to free the Torch by changing Galactus back into Galan.\n\nGalactus consumes Beta Ray Bill's Korbinite home world and reveals a new herald: Stardust. When the Negative Zone villain Annihilus launches a war on the universe, one of his first attacks destroys the Kyln and frees Tenebrous and Aegis. Sensing their release, Galactus temporarily releases Stardust from service and reemploys the Silver Surfer as his herald. Aegis and Tenebrous find and defeat the Silver Surfer and Galactus, delivering them to Annihilus.\n\nAnnihilus binds Galactus, and plans to use his energy to destroy all life in the universe. Drax the Destroyer frees Galactus, and after Galactus teleports Drax to safety, unleashes a blast which destroys most of Annihilus's forces. Galactus accepts Stardust as his herald again, with Silver Surfer. Seeking a final confrontation with Aegis and Tenebrous, Galactus sends the Silver Surfer to locate them. The Surfer finds them and engages them in battle, drawing Aegis and Tenebrous into the barrier between the universe and the Negative Zone (which destroys them).\n\nAfter an encounter with Epoch, Galactus consumes the planet Orbucen. He and Stardust again come into conflict with Beta Ray Bill when a distraught Bill seeks vengeance against Galactus for the destruction of the Korbinite home world. Feeling empathy for the only survivor of a destroyed planet, Galactus creates a female Korbinite for Bill.\n\nGalactus is drawn to the planet Sakaar and devours it, earning the enmity of Skaar and Hiro-Kala. Hiro-Kala poisons Galactus with the Old Power, a synthesized form of the Power Cosmic.\n\nThe Silver Surfer finds the body of a future Galactus under New York City, and summons the present Galactus (who confronts Mr. Fantastic) to Earth. Mr. Fantastic explains that in the future, the heroes on a dying Earth had killed Galactus to escape to the present with time travel. When he discovers that those heroes live on a planet called Nu-Earth in the present, Galactus destroys it (and its inhabitants) in retribution.\n\nA tear in the fabric of space caused by the Annihilation Wave and other interstellar conflicts allows the extra-universal forces of the Cancerverse (a universe without death) to invade. Galactus, the Celestials and the resurrected Tenebrous and Aegis combat the powerful Cancerverse weapon, the Galactus Engine (constructed around the corpse of the Cancerverse's counterpart to Galactus).\n\nIn the \"Chaos War\" storyline Galactus is teleported to Earth by Hercules to help fight the Chaos King, a metaphysical embodiment of oblivion and another antithesis of Eternity. While Hulk and his allies (the God Squad, Alpha Flight and the surviving Dead Avengers) fight Amatsu-Mikaboshi's forces, Amadeus Cho and Galactus work on a machine which will move Earth to the sealed-off continuum.\n\nAfter an encounter with the High Evolutionary, Galactus attacks Asgard. The Silver Surfer says that Galactus is looking for an Asgardian artifact to sate his hunger and spare future civilizations, while Odin contends that Galactus wants to ensure that he is not replaced in the next universe. Galactus and Odin engage in a battle that ends when the Silver Surfer offers to remain on Earth to guard the artifact, if Galactus can have it after Asgard dies. To replace the Surfer, Galactus takes a preacher (Praeter) as his new herald and is pulled through a hole in space-time to an alternate universe. He meets another version of himself, a space-faring mechanical hive-mind called Gah Lak Tus, and they merge into one being while using portions of the collective of machines to fulfill the purpose of his heralds. With Galactus proving to be too powerful to defeat in a straight fight, the Ultimate Marvel heroes, after a brief trip to Earth-616 to acquire local information on Galactus, eventually manage to send Galactus to the Negative Zone, reasoning that he will eventually starve to death due to the fact that Negative Zone is made of anti-matter. Following an incident where the Eternal known as Ikaris is brainwashed by a Kree device called the God's Whisper, he swears vengeance on his would-be captors. With help from Aarkus, the Eternals find the comatose Galactus floating in the Negative Zone, and state that they plan to use the God's Whisper to unleash him upon the Kree when he awakens.\n\nSometime later, Galactus is freed upon the universe and plans to devour Earth once again. He befriends Squirrel Girl and her sidekick Tippy Toe, who are the only ones he has ever met who see him as an equal. They convince him to go to another, uninhabited planet, which is devoid of intelligent life but rich in nuts. After that, he sends the two back to Earth and leaves.\n\nThe Ultimates, a team formed to solve cosmic scale problems, retrieve Galactus' incubator and force him into it. This time, Galactus emerges from it as a lifebringer instead of a Devourer of Worlds. His first act is to restore Archeopia, the first victim of his hunger. He later finds Conner Sims (aka the Anti-Man) outside the Multiverse and using his newfound powers as the Lifebringer, Galactus transforms Sims into his first Herald of Life. Sims was then sent to recruit the recently-disbanded Ultimates in order to help him discover who had imprisoned Eternity.\n\nGalactus was created during the union of the Sentience of the [previous] Universe and Galan of Taa, and a herald described him as \"the physical, metamorphosed embodiment of a cosmos.\" Galactus considers himself a higher being than all non-abstracts, maintaining his existence by devouring planets with the potential to support life. This has resulted in the elimination of entire extraterrestrial civilizations on a number of worlds.\n\nGalactus wields a type of cosmic energy known as the Power Cosmic and has appointed a number of beings as his heralds, granting each a small fraction of the Power Cosmic. This Power Cosmic replaces the auras (or souls) of its holders, causing each wielder's physical form to adapt to store and manipulate it. Galactus can remove the Power Cosmic from the person to whom he has given it. He can use the Power Cosmic to produce nearly any effect he desires, including size alteration, the transmutation of matter, the teleportation of objects across space, the creation of force fields and interdimensional portals, telepathy, telekinesis, universal cosmic awareness, the creation of life, resurrection, manipulating souls, memories and emotions, recreating dead worlds in every detail (including utterly convincing illusions of their entire populations), and energy projection.\n\nThanos wielding the Infinity Gauntlet ranked him on roughly the same scale of power as the Celestials, the Stranger, Odin, and Zeus, but below that of Mistress Love, Lord Chaos, and Master Order. However, he has shown the ability to overcome Odin, and after devouring four planets, Galactus has been shown capable of fighting four Celestials, and destroying one of them, although when they fused together into a powerful Celestial he was defeated. In a conflict Galactus intervened in between two other cosmic beings (Scrier and the Other), the confrontation was stated to eventually threaten two universes, and to have resulted in Oblivion's triumph had it persisted. As \"The Lifebringer\" Galactus is superior to Lord Chaos and Master Order, but stated that the Molecule Man could erase him with a thought.\n\nAlthough not an abstract, non-corporeal being, Galactus is a living force of nature set on correcting the imbalances between the conceptual entities Eternity and Death. His true form cannot be perceived by most beings; each species sees Galactus in a form they can comprehend, similar to their race or a deity of their religion. Galactus has also appeared as a humanoid star when addressing fellow members of the cosmic hierarchy.\n\nAs Galactus feeds to sustain himself, he must wear armor to help regulate his internal energy. Due to this hunger, Earth's heroes have been successful in defeating a weakened Galactus. In this state Galactus has also shown susceptibility to Ikonn's spell, which forces him to remember all of the beings he has destroyed from his feeding.\n\nThe first (and oldest) living entity in the universe, Galactus employs advanced science capable of creating the Ultimate Nullifier (capable of destroying and remaking the multiverse) and the ship Taa II. Reed Richards speculated that Taa II (the Möbius strip-shaped, solar system-sized home of Galactus) might be the greatest source of energy in the universe. Galactus also has the Punisher cyborgs in his service.\n\nThe heralds are servants of Galactus who wield the Power Cosmic he gave them, and scour the universe searching for planets that he could devour. Heralds in the main continuity of the Marvel Universe include:\n\nIn 2009, Galactus ranked 5th on IGN's list of \"Top 100 Comic Book Villains\". They cited his \"larger than life presence\" as making him one of the more important villains ever created, and that his ties to Earth and its heroes make him one of the greats. They also felt that \"Galactus is one of the few villains on our list to really defy the definition of an evil-doer\" because he is compelled to destroy worlds because of his hunger.\n\nNumerous versions of Galactus exist in alternate universes.\n\nThe final issue of \"The Adventures of the X-Men\" reveals that the previous universe from which Galan originates was the one that contained Earth-92131, the setting of the 1992 \"X-Men\" animated series. Galan's rebirth as Galactus is depicted as being observed by the Living Tribunal, and the Brothers from \"DC vs. Marvel\".\n\nIn the Amalgam Comics universe combining Marvel and DC characters, Galactus is combined with DC's Brainiac to create Galactiac. He consumes the life force of planets to recharge his energy (leaving a small part of the planet to study), and encounters the Challengers of the Fantastic when he comes to Earth.\n\nIn the final part of the five-issue alternate-reality miniseries \"Bullet Points\" (January–May 2007) Galactus arrives on Earth with Silver Surfer, intending to consume the planet as in the mainstream continuity. After Earth's superhumans are killed or injured trying to stop him, the Hulk (Peter Parker in this reality) attacks Galactus and is killed. Parker's courageous death inspires the Surfer to turn on Galactus, who flees Earth.\n\nGalactus has appeared in three DC Comics crossover stories: \"Darkseid/Galactus: The Hunger\", \"Superman/Fantastic Four: The Infinite Destruction\" and \"JLA/Avengers\". In \"The Hunger\" he tries to consume Apokolips, home of the evil New Gods, but stops when he realizes that the planet is lifeless. In \"The Infinite Destruction\" the Cyborg Superman (having learned about Galactus during a previous fight with the Silver Surfer) creates false evidence that Galactus was involved in the destruction of Krypton, tricking Superman into traveling to the Marvel Universe so that Cyborg could become Galactus's herald. The plan fails when Galactus chooses Superman instead, but Superman's strong will and the scale of influence that the destruction of Krypton has had on his development allows Superman to resist Galactus's conditioning. At the conclusion of the story, Superman and Reed Richards reprogram Galactus's equipment to drain energy from him instead of planets, ordering him to only feed on lifeless worlds in future. With the Cyborg's deception exposed, Galactus turns the Cyborg into a metal block in response to his pleas for perfection.\n\nHe plays a key role in \"JLA/Avengers\" when Krona comes to the Marvel Universe for knowledge about the creation of the cosmos. The Grandmaster tries to prevent Krona from destroying the Marvel Universe by revealing the existence of Galactus (a being who lived through the Big Bang, and can tell Krona what came before) and offering to play a game with Krona for the being's identity. As a result, the Justice League and the Avengers are manipulated into competing against each other to acquire twelve items of power from their respective universes, but although the League - serving as the Grandmaster's team - wins the conflict, Krona kills Galactus and the Grandmaster to obtain the knowledge he seeks (nearly destroying both universes despite the Grandmaster using the assembled items to briefly trap Krona) before the two teams can destroy Krona's equipment and his base, built from Galactus's remains, and allow the universes to be restored to their proper condition (including restoring Galactus and the Grandmaster to life).\n\nIn the limited series \"The Thanos Imperative\" a version of Galactus, the Galactus Engine, dwarfs the mainstream-universe Galactus.\n\nIn the limited series \"Earth X\", Galactus is one of the three essential entities in the universe keeping cosmic entities the Celestials in check. By destroying planets (\"eggs\" of the Celestials), he prevents them from overpopulating the universe. Franklin Richards adopts Galactus's identity.\n\nAn alternate-universe version of Galactus appears in \"Exiles\", restoring (instead of destroying) worlds. This version of the character came under assault by a version of Norrin Radd (The Silver Surfer) determined to force Galactus to restore Zenn-La. To combat him, Sabretooth of the Weapon X team of Exiles convinced this Galactus to grant him the Power Cosmic in order to defeat him. Afterwards, Sabretooth asks to be allowed to return the Power Cosmic to Galactus, a request which impresses him and he agrees to allow Sabretooth to revert to normal and go on his way.\n\nGalacta, a female character spawned as an anomalous energy field within Galactus, was created by writer Adam Warren and penciller Hector Sevilla Lujan for \"Galacta (or: The World-Eater's daughter)\" in \"Marvel Assistant-Sized Spectacular\" #2 (June 2009) and later appeared in the four-issue Marvel Unlimited miniseries \"Galacta: Daughter of Galactus\" #0–3 (January–April 2010). A normal-sized young adult human female on Earth (her chosen home), she suffers from a hunger similar to her parent's but her conscience permits her to devour alien invaders only.\n\nSpider-Man's Aunt, May Parker, was transformed by Galactus into the cosmically-powered being Golden Oldie to serve as his herald. Rather than lead him to populated worlds, Oldie discovered an extraterrestrial baker who bakes planet-sized snack cakes that sate Galactus's hunger. May's transformation is revealed as a dream. The issue of \"Marvel Team-Up\", a parody of an old Hostess snack cake advertising campaign, was part of Marvel's \"Assistant Editors Month\" series of humorous issues.\n\nIn the alternate future of Earth-691, the original Guardians of the Galaxy witness the formation of a symbiotic relationship between Galactus and the former Silver Surfer, now known as the Keeper. Having been named a Protector of the Universe by Eon and further empowered with the Quantum Bands, the Keeper could not only stand as an equal with Galactus, but possessed sufficient power to supply Galactus with energy, ending his need to consume worlds to feed his hunger.\n\nGalactus appears in the second volume of the \"Fantastic Four\" in the pocket universe created by Franklin Richards after the events of the Onslaught saga. This version of the character has five heralds simultaneously, all of whom are worshiped by the Inhumans. They are the Silver Surfer, Firelord, Terrax, Air-Walker and Plasma. They were all used to try to consume the Earth, but were eventually unsuccessful when the Silver Surfer turned on his master.\n\nIn \"New Mangaverse\" Galactus appears as a gigantic, planet-sized life form, with a single, massive eye and tentacles to drain life from planets. It is covered with a number of life forms (Galactus spores), which aid its digestion. This version also has four sentries which resemble the Silver Surfer, Terrax, Nova, and Firelord.\n\nThe limited series \"Marvel Zombies\" focuses on the Earth-2149 universe, which is infected by a virus changing sentient beings into flesh-eating zombies. The Silver Surfer is caught and devoured by \"zombified\" versions of Earth's heroes, who use technology to wound (and eventually defeat) Galactus. As they devour Galactus, the zombies (known as the Galacti) receive a portion of the Power Cosmic.\n\nThe MC2 title \"Last Planet Standing\" features a future version of Galactus with a new herald, Dominas. He tries to recreate the universe by triggering a new Big Bang, but is defeated when Earth's heroes disrupt his equipment; this allows the Silver Surfer to take Dominas's power and merge with Galactus, creating a new being who vows to repair worlds instead of destroying them.\n\nThree limited series (\"Ultimate Nightmare\", \"Ultimate Secret\" and \"Ultimate Extinction\") were published by Ultimate Marvel, introducing the threatening entity Gah Lak Tus. First mentioned by the robot Ultimate Vision, Gah Lak Tus is shown to be a group mind of city-sized robotic drones. The group mind attacks worlds via envoys similar to the Silver Surfer, who introduce a flesh-eating virus. Gah Lak Tus merges with Galactus when a temporal rift sends the latter being to the Ultimate Marvel universe.\n\nGalactus appears several times in \"Wha...Huh?\", an in-house Marvel spoof one-shot. One segment was entitled, \"What If Galactus Got Food Poisoning?\".\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "13095", "title": "Galactus"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13097", "text": "Game Boy Color\n\nThe , referred to as GBC, is a handheld game console manufactured by Nintendo, which was released on October 21, 1998 in Japan and was released in November of the same year in international markets. It is the successor of the Game Boy.\n\nThe Game Boy Color, as suggested by the name, features a color screen, but no backlight. It is slightly thicker and taller than the Game Boy Pocket, which is a redesigned Game Boy released in 1996. As with the original Game Boy, it has a custom 8-bit processor somewhat related to a Zilog Z80 central processing unit (CPU). The original name - with its American English spelling of \"color\" - remained unchanged even in markets where \"colour\" was the accepted English spelling.\n\nWhile mostly retaining the same hardware as the original Game Boy, the Game Boy Color's primary competitors were the much more advanced Neo Geo Pocket by SNK and the WonderSwan by Bandai (released in Japan only), though the Game Boy Color outsold these by a wide margin. The Game Boy and Game Boy Color combined have sold 118.69 million units worldwide. It was discontinued in 2003, shortly after the release of the Game Boy Advance SP.\n\nThe Game Boy Color was a response to pressure from game developers for a more sophisticated handheld platform, as they felt that the Game Boy, even in its latest incarnation, the Game Boy Pocket, was insufficient. The resultant product was backward compatible, a first for a handheld system, and leveraged the large library of games and installed base of the predecessor system. This became a major feature of the Game Boy line, since it allowed each new launch to begin with a significantly larger library than any of its competitors.\n\n\nThe technical details for the console are as follows:\nThe processor, which is a Z80 workalike made by Sharp with a few extra (bit manipulation) instructions, has a clock speed of approximately 8 MHz, twice as fast as that of the original Game Boy. The Game Boy Color also has three times as much memory as the original (32 kilobytes system RAM, 16 kilobytes video RAM). The screen resolution was the same as the original Game Boy, which is 160x144 pixels.\n\nThe Game Boy Color also featured an infrared communications port for wireless linking. The feature was only supported in a small number of games, so the infrared port was dropped from the Game Boy Advance line, to be later reintroduced with the Nintendo 3DS, though wireless linking (using Wi-Fi) would return in the Nintendo DS line. The console was capable of showing up to 56 different colors simultaneously on screen from its palette of 32,768 (8x4 color background palettes, 8x3+transparent sprite palettes), and could add basic four-, seven- or ten-color shading to games that had been developed for the original 4-shades-of-grey Game Boy. In the 7-color modes, the sprites and backgrounds were given separate color schemes, and in the 10-color modes the sprites were further split into two differently-colored groups; however, as flat black (or white) was a shared fourth color in all but one (7-color) palette, the overall effect was that of 4, 6 or 8 colors. This method of upgrading the color count resulted in graphic artifacts in certain games; for example, a sprite that was supposed to meld into the background would sometimes be colored separately, making it easily noticeable.\n\nA few games used \"Hi-Color mode\" to increase the number of colors available on-screen. This is a mode used most notably by the Italian company 7th Sense s.r.l., and can display more than 2000 different colors on the screen. Some examples of games using this method are \"The Fish Files\", \"The New Addams Family Series\" and \"Alone in the Dark: The New Nightmare\".\n\nWhen playing an original Game Boy game on a later system, the user can choose which color palette is used. This is achieved by pressing certain button combinations, namely either A or B (or neither) and a direction key while the Game Boy logo is displayed on the screen.\n\nThese palettes each contain up to ten colors. In most games, the four shades displayed on the original Game Boy would translate to different subsets of this 10-color palette, such as by displaying movable sprites in one subset and backgrounds, etc. in another. The grayscale (Left + B) palette produces an appearance identical to that experienced on the original Game Boy; the inverted colors palette (Right + B) inverts the colors from the Game Boy Color's color palettes.\nIn addition, some Game Boy games have a special palette that is enabled when no buttons are pressed. Any game that does not have a special palette will default to the dark green palette. The default palettes are stored in a database within the internal boot ROM of the system, and not the game cartridge itself.\n\nTitles that have color palettes on Super Game Boy will usually default to a similar palette when played on a Game Boy Color.\n\n\nGame Boy Color games are housed in clear-colored cartridges and are shaped differently from original Game Boy games. These games would display a warning message and refuse to play if used in older Game Boy models. Games that are designed for the Game Boy Color, but which also include backward compatibility with the previous Game Boy systems, are shaped like original Game Boy games, but usually have black colored cartridges. \"Pokémon Gold\" and \"Silver\" are also examples of Game Boy Color games that work on an original Game Boy system. The clear-colored Game Boy Color cartridges will function correctly only when used in a Game Boy Color or a later model (a Game Boy Advance, Game Boy Advance SP, or Game Boy Player).\n\nThe logo for Game Boy Color spelled out the word \"COLOR\" in the five original colors in which the unit was manufactured. They were named:\n\nAnother color released at the same time was \"Atomic Purple\", made of a transparent purple plastic that was also used on the color-respective Nintendo 64 controller.\n\nOther colors were sold as limited editions or in specific countries.\n\nThe last Game Boy Color game released in Japan (which was also compatible with the Game Boy and Super Game Boy) was \"From TV Animation – One Piece: Maboroshi no Grand Line Boukenhen!\" (July 2002). The last Game Boy and Super Game Boy compatible game released there was \"Dragon Warrior Monsters 2\" (September 2001). The last North American Game Boy Color-exclusive game, however, was \"Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets\". Although it was released on different consoles, the Game Boy Color featured an exclusive version.\n\nWith the release of the Nintendo 3DS, the Virtual Console service is also available for the 3DS. This allows players to play games from the Game Boy and Game Boy Color. More games for both systems are planned for release.\n\nCombined, the Game Boy and Game Boy Color were both commercially successful, with 32.47 million units in Japan, 44.06 million in the Americas, and 42.16 million in other regions.\n\n\n", "id": "13097", "title": "Game Boy Color"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13098", "text": "Genosha\n\nGenosha is a fictional country appearing in American comic book series published by Marvel Comics. It is an island nation that exists in Marvel's main shared universe, known as \"Earth 616\" in the Marvel Universe and a prominent place in the X-Men chronology. The fictional nation served as an allegory for slavery and later for South African apartheid before becoming a mutant homeland and subsequently a disaster zone. The island is located off the Southeastern African coast northwest from Seychelles and northeast of Madagascar. Its capital city was Hammer Bay.\n\nGenosha first appeared in \"Uncanny X-Men\" #235 (October 1988), and was created by Chris Claremont and Rick Leonardi.\n\nGenosha received an entry in the \"Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe Update '89\" #3.\n\nThe island is located off the east coast of Africa, to the north of Madagascar, and boasted a high standard of living, an excellent economy, and freedom from the political and racial turmoil that characterized neighboring nations. However, Genosha's prosperity was built upon the enslavement of its mutant population. Mutants in Genosha were the property of the state and children who were positively identified with the mutant gene were put through a process developed by David Moreau, commonly known as the Genegineer, stripped of free will and made into \"mutates\" (a Marvel term for genetically modified individuals, as opposed to those who developed mutant powers naturally). The Genegineer was also capable of modifying certain mutant abilities in order to fulfill specific labor shortages. Citizenship in Genosha is permanent and the government does not recognize any emigration. Citizens who attempt to leave the country are tracked down and forcibly brought back to the island by the special police force known as Magistrates, and mutant problems are handled by a special group known as the Press Gang. The Press Gang consisted of Hawkshaw, Pipeline, and Punchout, and were aided in their task by Wipeout.\n\nThe foundations of Genoshan society has been upset in recent years due to the efforts of outside mutant interests. In the first storyline to feature the nation, some members of the X-Men (Wolverine, Rogue, and their ally Madelyne Pryor) were kidnapped by Genoshan Magistrates, under the order of the Genegineer. Later, in the multi-issue, multi-title \"X-Tinction Agenda\" storyline, the X-Men and their allies rescued their teammates, Storm, Meltdown, Rictor and Wolfsbane, from Genoshan brainwashing, toppling the government after discovering their alliance with former X-Factor ally turned mutant hater, Cameron Hodge, and that Havok was one of the Magistrates since having his memory wiped by the Siege Perilous. Havok himself, woken from his conditioning by his brother Cyclops dealt the killing blow to Cameron Hodge in the process.\n\nA new Genoshan regime that promised better treatment of mutants was put in place after Hodge's destruction. A period of general turmoil and a number of attacks by superhumans, including Magneto's Acolytes who were unwilling to forgive the former Genoshan government for its crimes against mutants, followed.\n\nA different version of X-Factor, including Wolfsbane, later returned to the island to help restore peace between its government and a rogue group of super-powered beings that had fled the island. The Genoshan government was shown with peaceful intentions, even trying to undo the ill effects visited upon Wolfsbane. Genosha was also shown to have typical suburban tract housing, like many small towns in America.\n\nAfter the \"Age of Apocalypse\" story arc, it was revealed and retconned that the mutate process formula was given to the Genegineer by Sugar Man, a refugee of the \"Age of Apocalypse\" timeline.\n\nThe United Nations ceded the island nation to the powerful mutant Magneto, after he demanded an entire mutants-only nation. Magneto and his Acolytes managed to reestablish a modicum of peace and stability only briefly until civil war broke out between him and the remaining human population on the island led by the Magistrates. Magneto eventually defeated the Magistrates and restored order to most of the island, with hold-outs briefly remaining at Carrion Cove before being obliterated.\n\nThe elimination of the Legacy Virus gave Magneto a freshly healthy army, leading him to declare a campaign of global conquest. A small team of X-Men stopped this plan, badly injuring Magneto in the process (the original issue presented him as being killed, but \"New X-Men\" retconned this).\n\nBy \"New X-Men\" #115, Genosha had a population of sixteen million mutants and a stable, advanced society. However, the entire island was reduced to rubble and its mutant population was slain by Cassandra Nova's Wild Sentinels. There were few survivors, many evacuated, and the Brotherhood of Mutants turned one of the Sentinels into a memorial statue in #132.\n\nMagneto and Xavier have since then joined forces to rebuild the island nation as detailed in the series \"Excalibur\" vol. 3 (2004). This goes badly as foreign military forces have thrown up a cordon around the island; no one is allowed to enter, and those trying to leave are fired upon.\n\nA few survivors and newly arriving mutants who wish to help with the rebuilding process remain on the island. Members of this volunteer 'army' include Callisto, Freakshow and Wicked. More are found in the surrounding countryside, some join with Xavier. There is a conflict with Magistrates, the island's former law enforcement. Though they are assisted by humanoid creatures they refer to as 'trolls', the Magistra's forces are driven off. Some of the Magistrates are captured and kept in the island's makeshift jail.\n\nIn \"Excalibur\" #6, some of the captured Magistrates agree to work with Xavier to rebuild the island. Throughout the entire series, Unus the Untouchable and his squadron of mutants remain a problem; they don't wish to be part of Xavier's group.\n\nLater Magneto learned of his daughter the Scarlet Witch's nervous break-down and her ever-growing powers to alter reality. Magneto snatched Wanda from her battle with her fellow Avengers and brought her to Genosha, where he asked Xavier to restore the Scarlet Witch’s sanity - but to no avail. The telepath couldn’t help her and, concerned of the threat to reality that Wanda posed, Xavier consulted the Avengers and the X-Men about what to do with her. Their decision was rendered moot, though, as by the time they reached Genosha reality altered around the heroes - changing into the world ruled by the \"House of M\".\n\nWhile conventional reality was eventually restored, it came at a high price, as thousands if not millions of Earth’s mutant population lost their powers or died in the process, leaving only a few hundred mutants alive and powered. Just like most of his new Genoshan allies and enemies, Magneto was among the depowered people, remaining trapped on the island.\n\nIn the limited series \"Son of M\" there is a battle between some of the remaining mutants and the Inhumans.\n\nIn \"New Avengers\" #19-20 it was stated that energy cannot be created nor destroyed, and the same held true for the energies of the numerous depowered mutants. Eventually, these energies gathered in the form of an unsuspecting energy-absorbing mutant named Michael Pointer. Dubbed \"the Collective\" by the Avengers, against whom he then fought, the Collective traveled to Genosha and reached out to the startled Magneto. The Collective, controlled by Xorn, attempted to restore Magneto’s powers and convince him to lead the remaining mutants into taking over the planet. To the Collective’s surprise, Magneto resisted and allowed the Avengers to separate the energy from his body and send it into the sun. The comatose Magneto is also taken into S.H.I.E.L.D. custody, but the helicopter that was supposed to transport him off Genosha explodes once it lifts off. Magneto’s body is not found. It has since been revealed that he survived the explosion and remained depowered until the High Evolutionary's dangerous experiment returned his magnetic abilities.\n\nTo date Genosha is now completely dead. Already in ruins before, the battle between the Inhumans and the O*N*E further destroyed the once-proud island nation.\n\nSince Magneto was the last person on Genosha, it seems that it’s now totally uninhabited, which is corroborated by Wiccan and Speed when they began their search for their mother, the Scarlet Witch. They encountered Genosha an empty land filled with destroyed towers and empty streets.\n\nSelene is seen traveling to the ruined island of Genosha with her followers who were resurrected by the Technarch transmode virus. Led there by Blink and Caliban, who tells Selene he senses millions of dead mutants. They enter the ruins and Selene proclaims Hammer Bay, the devastated capital of the island nation Necrosha, the place where she will become a god.\n\nWith Eli Bard, Selene resurrects the massacred residents of Genosha, with Cerebro and Bastion's computers detecting the rise of mutant numbers into the millions. A problem presents itself in that many of the newly resurrected mutants have been de-powered, despite having been killed \"before\" M-Day. Wither and Mortis explain what happened and the Coven begins to set up base at Necrosha.\n\nSelene is eventually defeated and killed, thus ending the effect of the corrupted Techno-organic virus in the bodies she revived and returning Genosha to an empty land. According to writer Chris Yost, Elixir is still on Necrosha.\n\nDuring a visit to Genosha by the students of Jean Grey's School for Gifted Youngsters' students organized by Beast and Kitty Pryde, Sabretooth and AOA Blob assaulted Kid Gladiator and Kid Omega in order to kidnap Genesis. During this time, there were no mentionings of Elixir living here.\n\nDuring the \"AXIS\" storyline, Magneto enters the island of Genosha to find that it had turned into a concentration camp for mutants. He frees two mutant girls who tell him that Red Skull is responsible and possesses Professor X's brain. Magneto attacks Red Skull, but is quickly stopped by the Skull's S-Men. Magneto is captured and telepathically tortured by Red Skull. He is given visions of those closest to him suffering while being unable to do anything to stop it. After being freed by Scarlet Witch, Rogue, and Havok, he bites down on a vial beneath his skin of Mutant Growth Hormone, giving himself enough power to fight. Havok, Rogue, and Scarlet Witch are captured by the Red Skull's S-Men and sent to his concentration camp in Genosha. Rogue (who still has Wonder Man inside her) is able to break the group free. They discover Magneto has been captured, and free him, as well. The three want to leave the island and alert the rest of the Avengers and X-Men of what Red Skull is doing, but Magneto says he's going to stay and fight. Before they can do anything, Red Skull appears. Magneto, Rogue, and the Scarlet Witch fought Red Onslaught in Genosha and are later joined by the Avengers and the X-Men. Iron Man used a telepathic tamperer to stop the Red Skull's influence. When more heroes arrived to help, Red Onslaught revealed that he influenced Stark to create a model of Sentinels, based on the knowledge of different super heroes he acquired after the Civil War before erasing the latter's memories of constructing them. Red Onslaught then deployed his Stark Sentinels to fight the heroes.\n\nAs part of the \"All-New, All-Different Marvel\", Magneto and his use Genosha as a staging ground for an ambush on the Dark Riders, who have been targeting mutants with healing powers. After defeating the Dark Riders, Magneto then ties up the Dark Riders and sets off a bomb that kills them and also levels the entire island. It was a sign that Magneto has \"no intention of 'Laying Low'.\"\n\n\nIn this reality, there is a prison called Genosha Bay Prison which is somewhat similar to Guantánamo Bay. It was originally settled by Quaker missionaries who built a penitentiary so to isolate prisoners from each other so they could contemplate the gravity of their sins. By the 1930s, Genosha Bay later became a United States extraterritorial prison which hold prisoners of the worse cases from around the world and was notorious for practicing inhumane punishments on its prisoners ranging from sleep deprivations and water torture. Genosha Bay Prison caught the notice of the public and culminating in a Senate Judiciary Meeting on consider closing the prison. Even if the prison were to be close down, lawmakers were unwilling to let its more severe criminal sociopaths from allowing into America's prisons. In reality, Genosha Bay Prison was used as a proving ground in recruiting the prisoners as a next generation of government operatives.\n\nIn the Ultimate Marvel reality, Genosha has made an appearance. It is an island south of Madagascar. Its main export seems to be television programs. Mutants were recently reduced to second-class citizens after the murder of a government minister by a mutant called Longshot. Citizens include Mojo Adams, Spiral, and Deadpool.\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "13098", "title": "Genosha"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13104", "text": "Grinnell College\n\nGrinnell College is a private liberal arts college in Grinnell, Iowa, U.S., known for its rigorous academics and tradition of social responsibility. It was founded in 1846, when a group of New England Congregationalists established the Trustees of Iowa College.\n\nIn its 2016 edition of \"America's Best Colleges\", \"U.S. News & World Report\" ranked Grinnell tied for 19th among all liberal arts colleges in the United States, and tied for highest economic diversity as measured by low-income students receiving federal Pell Grants.\n\nIn 1843, eleven Congregational ministers, all of whom trained at Andover Theological Seminary in Massachusetts, set out to proselytize on the frontier. Each man pledged to gather a church and together the group or band would seek to establish a college. When the group arrived in Iowa later that year, each selected a different town in which to establish a congregation. In 1846, they collectively established Iowa College in Davenport. A few months later, Iowa joined the Union.\n\nThe first 25 years of Grinnell's history saw a change in name and location. Iowa College moved farther west from Davenport, Iowa, to the town of Grinnell and unofficially adopted the name of its benefactor: an abolitionist minister, Josiah Bushnell Grinnell, to whom journalist Horace Greeley supposedly wrote \"Go West, young man, go West.\" However, Greeley vehemently denied ever saying this to Grinnell, or to anyone. The name of the corporation \"The Trustees of Iowa College\" remained, but in 1909 the name \"Grinnell College\" was adopted by the trustees for the institution.\n\nIn its early years, the College experienced setbacks. Although two students received bachelor of arts degrees in 1854 (the first to be granted by a college west of the Mississippi River), within 10 years the Civil War had claimed most of Grinnell's students and professors. In the decade following the war, growth resumed: women were officially admitted as candidates for degrees, and the curriculum was enlarged to include then-new areas of academic studies, such as natural sciences with laboratory work.\n\nIn 1882, Grinnell College was struck by a tornado — then called a cyclone, after which the college yearbook was named. The storm devastated the campus and destroyed both College buildings. Rebuilding began immediately, and the determination to expand wasn't limited to architecture: the curriculum was again extended to include departments in political science (the first in the United States) and modern languages.\nGrinnell became known as the center of the Social Gospel reform movement, as Robert Handy writes, \"The movement centered on the campus of Iowa (now Grinnell) College. Its leading figures were Professor George D. Herron and President George A. Gates\". Other firsts pointed to the lighter side of college life: the first intercollegiate football and baseball games west of the Mississippi were played in Grinnell, and the home teams won.\n\nAs the 20th century began, Grinnell established a Phi Beta Kappa chapter, introduced the departmental \"major\" system of study, began Grinnell-in-China (an educational mission that lasted until the Japanese invasion and resumed in 1987), and built a women's residence hall system that became a national model. The social consciousness fostered at Grinnell during these years became evident during Franklin D. Roosevelt's presidency, when Grinnell graduates Harry Hopkins '12, Chester Davis '11, Paul Appleby '13, Hallie Flanagan '11, and Florence Kerr '12 became influential New Deal administrators.\n\nConcern with social issues, educational innovation, and individual expression continue to shape Grinnell. As an example, the school’s \"5th year travel-service program,\" preceded the establishment of the Peace Corps by many years. Other recent innovations include first-year tutorials, cooperative pre-professional programs, and programs in quantitative studies and the societal impacts of technology.\n\nGrinnell College is located in the town of Grinnell, Iowa, about halfway between Des Moines and Iowa City. The main campus is bounded by 6th Avenue (which is also US Highway 6) on the south, 10th Avenue on the north, East Street on the east and Park Street on the west. The campus contains sixty-three buildings ranging in style from Collegiate Gothic to Bauhaus. Goodnow Hall and Mears Cottage (1889) are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.\nThe residential part of campus is divided into three sections: North Campus, East Campus, and South Campus. North and South Campus' dormitories are modeled explicitly after the residential colleges of Oxford and Cambridge. The East Campus dormitories were designed by William Rawn Associates and feature a modern design Upon completion East Campus was awarded LEED certification. The four East Campus dorms are made out of Iowa limestone which helped in securing the LEED certification. All three campuses feature dormitory buildings that are connected by a loggia, an architectural signature of the college. The loggia on South Campus is the only entirely closed loggia, featuring walls on all sides, while the loggias on East and North campus are only partially closed. From the time that the first dorm opened in 1915 until the fall of 1968, the nine north campus dorms were exclusively for male students, and the six south campus dorms were reserved for female students. The dorms are much smaller than those seen in many schools, ranging from the smallest, Rawson Hall, which houses 34 students, to the largest, Younker Hall, which houses 113.\n\nMost academic buildings are located on the southwestern quarter of campus. The athletic facilities are mostly located on the northeastern quarter, and some facilities are located north of 10th Avenue.\n\nIn addition to the main campus, the college owns much of the adjacent property. Many administrative offices are located in converted houses across Park Street near the older academic buildings, and several residences are used for college-owned off-campus student housing.\n\nThe college maintains a environmental research area called the Conard Environmental Research Area (CERA). The U.S. Green Building Council awarded CERA's Environmental Education Center a gold certification. The building is the first in Iowa to receive the designation.\n\nMany building projects have been undertaken in recent years at the College including a new athletics center, the Bucksbaum Center for the Arts, the renovation of the Robert Noyce '49 Science Center and the Joe Rosenfield '25 Student Center. Noted architect César Pelli designed the athletics center, the Joe Rosenfield '25 Student Center, and the Bucksbaum Center for the Arts.\n\nGrinnell College is nationally recognized as a leading undergraduate institution. In July 2006, \"The New York Times\" included Grinnell in its profile of the 20 colleges and universities of \"established or rising scholarship\" which are fast becoming viable alternatives to Ivy League institutions, and is considered one of the 30 Hidden Ivies.\n\nThe 2016 annual ranking of \"U.S. News & World Report\" rates it tied for the 19th best liberal arts college in the nation, 5th for \"Best Undergraduate Teaching,\" and 7th in \"Best Value Schools.\" The College has been consistently ranked in the top 25 liberal arts colleges in the nation since the publication began in 1983. \"Kiplinger's Personal Finance\" ranks Grinnell 9th in its 2016 ranking of \"best value\" liberal arts colleges in the United States. Grinnell was ranked 15th in the 2015 \"Washington Monthly\" rankings, which focus on key outputs such as research, dollar value of scientific grants won, the number of graduates going on to earn Ph.D. degrees, and certain types of public service. In \"Forbes\" magazine's 2015 rankings of academic institutions, \"America's Top Colleges\" (which uses a non-traditional ranking system based on RateMyProfessors.com evaluations, notable alumni, student debt, percentage of students graduating in four years, and the number of students or faculty receiving prestigious awards), Grinnell College was ranked 56th among all private colleges, and 9th in the Midwest.\n\nData analyzed in 2006 place Grinnell at number eight among all U.S. undergraduate institutions in the proportion of graduates who go on to earn Ph.D. degrees and 15th for graduating female Ph.D. earners. Grinnell College graduates enjoy a high acceptance rate to law school; over 46% of all applications submitted by students have been accepted by law schools. Unigo.com's 2010 college rankings place Grinnell College in the \"Top 10 Colleges Where the Pursuit of Knowledge Goes Outside the Classroom\".\n\nGrinnell had 171 full-time faculty in Fall 2015, 98% of whom possess a doctorate or the terminal degree in their field. At the end of each semester, students fill out course surveys which play a large role in determining faculty tenure decisions and merit raises.\n\nGrinnell's open curriculum encourages students to take initiative and to assume responsibility for their own courses of study. The sole core, or general education, requirement is the completion of the First-Year Tutorial, a one-semester, four-credit special topics seminar that stresses methods of inquiry, critical analysis, and writing skills. All other classes are chosen, with the direct guidance of a faculty member in the student's major department, by the student.\n\nThe academic program at Grinnell College emphasizes active learning and one-on-one interactions between faculty members and students. There are few large lecture classes. In sharp contrast to all public universities and many private universities in the United States, no classes, labs or other courses are taught by graduate students.\n\nGrinnell College expects all students to possess significant academic achievements. For example, the math department does not offer any basic-level classes such as college algebra, trigonometry, or pre-calculus, and remedial classes are not offered in any subject. However, several independent, non-credit programs assist students who need help in a specific subject. Among these programs are the Library Lab, Math Lab, Reading Lab, Science Learning Center, and the Writing Lab. While private tutors can be hired, participation in these programs is free for any enrolled student.\n\nGrinnell has twenty-six major departments and ten interdisciplinary concentrations. Popular majors include Psychology, Economics, Biology, History, English, and Political Science. The minimum requirements in a major area of study are typically limited to 32 credits in a single department, with some departments additionally requiring a small number of classes in related fields that are deemed critical for all students in that field. For example, the biology program requires 32 credits in the biology department plus two classes in chemistry and one in math. Many students exceed the minimum requirements.\n\nTo graduate, students are normally expected to complete at least 32 credits in a major field and a total of 124 credits of academic work. To encourage students to explore courses outside of their primary interest area, no more than 48 credits in one department and no more than 92 credits in one division are counted towards this requirement.\nGrinnell’s commitment to the importance of off-campus study reflects the school’s emphasis on social and political awareness and the international nature of its campus. Approximately 60 percent of all Grinnell students participate in at least one of more than seventy off-campus programs, including the Grinnell-in-London program and study tours of China, France, Greece, and Russia. These study programs in Europe (including Russia), Africa, the Near East, and Asia, as well as nine programs in Central and South America, provide the opportunity for research in many disciplines, from archaeology to education to mathematics. In addition to off-campus programs, Grinnell offers internship programs in such areas as urban studies, art, and marine biology for students interested in field-based learning and experience in professional settings. Second- and third-year students may apply for summer internship grants and receive credit for the experience. Semester programs in the United States include those at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Newberry Library, National Theatre Institute, and Grinnell-in-Washington, D.C.\n\nGrinnell also has invested in several interdisciplinary programs: the Center for Prairie Studies, Center for the Humanities, Center for International Studies, Noun Program in Women's Studies, Peace Studies Program, Rosenfield Public Affairs Program, and the Donald L. Wilson Program in Enterprise and Leadership.\n\nDespite the growing trend of U.S. students taking five or more years to finish an undergraduate degree, Grinnell College is strongly oriented towards students being enrolled full-time in exactly eight consecutive semesters at the college, although exceptions are available for medical issues and other emergencies. To avoid being suspended from the college, students must make \"normal progress towards graduation.\" This generally means that the student must pass at least 12 credits of classes in each individual semester, with grades C or higher, and have accumulated enough credits to make graduation possible at the end of four years, which requires an average of 15.5 credits each semester. A student who is not making normal progress towards graduation is placed on academic probation and may be dismissed from the college.\n\n\"U.S. News & World Report\" classifies Grinnell's selectivity as \"most selective.\" For Fall 2015, Grinnell received 6,414 freshmen applications; 1,598 were admitted (24.9%). Of the 41% of enrolled freshmen who submitted class rank, 81% were in the top 10% of their high school classes and 96% were in the top quarter. The middle 50% range of SAT scores for the enrolled freshmen was 640-740 for critical reading and 660-770 for math, while the ACT Composite range was 30–33.\n\nGrinnell College's admission selectivity rating, according to The Princeton Review in 2008, is a 95 out of 99. This rating is determined by several institutionally reported factors, including: the class rank, average standardized test scores, and average high school GPA of entering freshmen; the percentage of students who hail from out-of-state; and the percentage of applicants accepted.\n\nThe primary factor in evaluating applicants is the quality of the education they have received, as shown by their transcript. Additional factors include standardized test scores, student writing skills, recommendations, and extracurricular activities.\n\nEarly decision rounds are offered to students in the fall; most students apply in January of their final year in high school. Admission decisions are released by April 1 of each year. All students begin classes in August.\n\nThe students' expectation of needing financial assistance does not affect the admission process.\n\nGrinnell's combined tuition, room, board, and fees for the 2013–2014 academic year is $53,654. Tuition and fees are $43,656 and room and board are $9,998. Grinnell offers a significant amount of need-based and merit-based aid in comparison with peer institutions. About 90% of students receive some form of financial aid. In 2013-2014, 24% of students enrolled at Grinnell College were receiving federal Pell Grants, which are generally reserved for students from low-income families. The average financial aid package is over $26,000.\n\nGrinnell College is one of a few dozen US colleges that maintain need-blind admissions and meets the full demonstrated financial need of all U.S. residents who are admitted to the college.\n\nWith the first-year students enrolled in the 2006–2007 school year, Grinnell has ended its need-blind admissions policy for international applicants. Under the old policy, students from countries outside the U.S. were admitted without any consideration of their ability to afford four years of study at the college. However, financial aid offers to these students were limited to half the cost of tuition. International students frequently carried very high workloads in an effort to pay the bills, and their academic performance often suffered. Under the new \"need-sensitive\" or \"need-aware\" policy, international students whose demonstrated financial needs can be met are given a slight admissions edge over applicants who can't. The twin hopes are that the enrolled international students will be able to dedicate more energy to their schoolwork, and also that this will ultimately allow the college to provide higher tuition grants to international students.\n\nAdditionally, several extremely competitive \"special scholarships\" were set up to meet the full demonstrated financial needs for students from the following countries or regions: Africa, Eastern and Central Europe, Latin America, Middle East and Asia, Nepal, the People's Republic of China, as well as for native speakers of Russian regardless of citizenship, available every other year.\n\nThe school's varsity sports teams are named the Pioneers. They participate in eighteen intercollegiate sports at the NCAA Division III level and in the Midwest Conference. In addition, Grinnell has several club sports teams that compete in non-varsity sports such as volleyball, sailing, water polo, ultimate and rugby union.\n\nNearly one-third of recent Grinnell graduates participated in at least one of varsity sports while attending the college and the college has led the Midwest Conference in the total number of Academic All-Conference honorees in last six years.\n\nThe men's water polo team, known as the Wild Turkeys, were runners-up in the 2007 College Water Polo Association (CWPA) Division III Collegiate National Club Championships hosted by Lindenwood University in St. Peters, Missouri. They also qualified for the tournament in 2008, 2009, 2011, 2013, and 2014. The Men's Ultimate team, nicknamed the Grinnellephants, qualified in 2008 for its first Division III National Championship in Versailles, Ohio. The Women's Ultimate team, nicknamed The Sticky Tongue Frogs, tied for third place in the 2010 Division III National Championship in Appleton, Wisconsin. The success was repeated in 2011 when the men's team placed third in 2011 Division III National Championship in Buffalo.\n\nIn February 2005, Grinnell became the first Division III school featured in a regular season basketball game by the ESPN network family in 30 years when it faced off against the Beloit Buccaneers on ESPN2. Grinnell lost 86-85. Grinnell College's basketball team attracted ESPN due to the team's run and gun style of playing basketball, known in Grinnell simply as \"The System.\" Coach Dave Arseneault originated the Grinnell System that incorporates a continual full-court press, a fast-paced offense, an emphasis on offensive rebounding, a barrage of three-point shots and substitutions of five players at a time every 35 to 40 seconds. This allows a higher average playing time for more players than the \"starters\" and suits the Division III goals of scholar-athletes. \"The System\" has been criticized for not teaching the principles of defense. However, under \"The System,\" Grinnell has won three conference championships over the past ten years and have regularly placed in the top half of the conference. Coach Arseneault's teams have set numerous NCAA scoring records and several individuals on the Grinnell team have led the nation in scoring or assists.\n\nOn November 19, 2011 Grinnell player Griffin Lentsch set a new Division III individual scoring record in a game against Principia College. The guard scored 89 points, besting the old record of 77, also set by a Pioneers player—Jeff Clement—in 1998. Lentsch made 27 of his 55 shots, including 15 three-pointers as Grinnell won the high-scoring game 145 to 97. On November 20, 2012 Grinnell's Jack Taylor broke Lentsch's scoring record, as well as the records for NCAA and collegiate scoring, in a 179-104 victory over Faith Baptist Bible. Taylor scored 138 points on 108 shots, along with 3 rebounds, 6 turnovers and 3 steals. Taylor went 27-71 from behind the arc. Taylor scored 109 points in a November 2013 game against Crossroads College to become the first player in NCAA history to have two 100-point games.\n\nThe organizational structure of the Student Government Association, wielding a yearly budget of over $360,000 and unusually strong administrative influence, covers almost all aspects of student activity and campus life.\n\nFounded in November 2000, the student-run Student Endowment Investing Group (SEIG), actively invests over $100,000 of Grinnell College's endowment in the stock market. The group's mission is to provide interested students with valuable experience for future careers in finance.\n\nService organizations are popular. The Alternative Break (\"AltBreak\") program takes students to pursue service initiatives during school holidays, and as of 2005, Grinnell had more alumni per capita serving in the Peace Corps than any other college in the nation. The college also runs its own post-graduation service program known as Grinnell Corps in Grinnell, China, Namibia, New Orleans, and Thailand, and has previously operated programs in Greece, Lesotho, Macau, and Nepal.\n\nThe \"Scarlet and Black\" is the campus newspaper and KDIC (88.5 FM) is the student-run radio station. The school has a monthly satirical newspaper, \"The B&S.\"\n\nIn April 2007, Grinnell college students founded the Social Entrepreneurs of Grinnell, a student operated microfinance lending institution. The group collects donations for the purpose of making small loans at zero interest to business owners and artisans around the world. It is affiliated with kiva.org.\n\nGrinnell also has an entirely student-run textbook lending library on campus. Aimed at the economically disadvantaged yet open to all, it allows students to check out books for the semester for free, defraying the high cost of college textbooks. The library has no funding, relying solely on books donated. Since its founding in 2005, the collection has grown to thousands of books due to the generosity of the campus community. The library has expanded to include caps and gowns, which are lent out to graduating seniors every spring.\n\nGrinnell hosts the Titular Head film festival.\n\nStudents at Grinnell adhere to an honor system known as \"self-governance\" wherein they are expected to govern their own choices and behavior with minimal direct intervention by the college administration. By cultivating a community based on freedom of choice, self-governance aims to encourage students to become responsible, respectful, and accountable members of the campus, town, and global community.\n\nWith an endowment of $1.79 billion (2015), Grinnell College is among the wealthiest educational institutions of any size in North America. Under the stewardship of Warren Buffett and Joseph Rosenfield, the college adopted an opportunistic strategy in managing its assets. In 1976, Grinnell's capital fund acquired a TV station, WDTN in Dayton, Ohio, one of many investments that were unprecedented in their time for a college endowment. (Grinnell would sell the station in 1981.) Another move that significantly increased the endowment occurred when Rosenfield and the college contributed to the founding of Intel—an investment exceeding 10% of the venture capital raised to start the semiconductor company (Intel co-founder Robert Noyce was a Grinnell alumnus).\n\nWarren Buffett played a significant role in growing the endowment at Grinnell, where he served as a trustee from 1968 until 2011, when he decided to step down from all boards not relating to Berkshire Hathaway.\n\nMany former students at Grinnell College have gone into politics, made important contributions to science, or become prominent entertainers. Some of the most prominent include:\n\n", "id": "13104", "title": "Grinnell College"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13108", "text": "Glendower\n\nGlendower may refer to:\n\n", "id": "13108", "title": "Glendower"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13109", "text": "Global warming controversy\n\nThe global warming controversy concerns the public debate over whether global warming is occurring, how much has occurred in modern times, what has caused it, what its effects will be, whether any action should be taken to curb it, and if so what that action should be. In the scientific literature, there is a strong consensus that global surface temperatures have increased in recent decades and that the trend is caused by human-induced emissions of greenhouse gases. No scientific body of national or international standing disagrees with this view, though a few organizations with members in extractive industries hold non-committal positions. Disputes over the key scientific facts of global warming are more prevalent in the media than in the scientific literature, where such issues are treated as resolved, and more prevalent in the United States than globally.\n\nPolitical and popular debate concerning the existence and cause of climate change includes the reasons for the increase seen in the instrumental temperature record, whether the warming trend exceeds normal climatic variations, and whether human activities have contributed significantly to it. Scientists have resolved these questions decisively in favour of the view that the current warming trend exists and is ongoing, that human activity is the cause, and that it is without precedent in at least 2000 years. Public disputes that also reflect scientific debate include estimates of how responsive the climate system might be to any given level of greenhouse gases (climate sensitivity), how global climate change will play out at local and regional scales, and what the consequences of global warming will be.\n\nGlobal warming remains an issue of widespread political debate, often split along party political lines, especially in the United States. Many of the issues that are settled within the scientific community, such as human responsibility for global warming, remain the subject of politically or economically motivated attempts to downplay, dismiss or deny them—an ideological phenomenon categorised by academics and scientists as climate change denial. The sources of funding for those involved with climate science—both supporting and opposing mainstream scientific positions—have been questioned by both sides. There are debates about the best policy responses to the science, their cost-effectiveness and their urgency. Climate scientists, especially in the United States, have reported official and oil-industry pressure to censor or suppress their work and hide scientific data, with directives not to discuss the subject in public communications. Legal cases regarding global warming, its effects, and measures to reduce it have reached American courts. The fossil fuels lobby has been identified as overtly or covertly supporting efforts to undermine or discredit the scientific consensus on global warming.\n\nIn the United States, the mass media devoted little coverage to global warming until the drought of 1988, and James E. Hansen's testimony to the Senate, which explicitly attributed \"the abnormally hot weather plaguing our nation\" to global warming.\n\nThe British press also changed its coverage at the end of 1988, following a speech by Margaret Thatcher to the Royal Society advocating action against human-induced climate change. According to Anabela Carvalho, an academic analyst, Thatcher's \"appropriation\" of the risks of climate change to promote nuclear power, in the context of the dismantling of the coal industry following the 1984–1985 miners' strike was one reason for the change in public discourse. At the same time environmental organizations and the political opposition were demanding \"solutions that contrasted with the government's\". In May 2013 Charles, Prince of Wales took a strong stance criticising both climate change deniers and corporate lobbyists by likening the Earth to a dying patient. \"A scientific hypothesis is tested to absolute destruction, but medicine can't wait. If a doctor sees a child with a fever, he can't wait for [endless] tests. He has to act on what is there.\"\n\nMany European countries took action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions before 1990. West Germany started to take action after the Green Party took seats in Parliament in the 1980s. All countries of the European Union ratified the 1997 Kyoto Protocol. Substantial activity by NGOs took place as well. The United States Energy Information Administration reports that, in the United States, \"The 2012 downturn means that emissions are at their lowest level since 1994 and over 12 percent below the recent 2007 peak.\"\n\nThe theory that increases in greenhouse gases would lead to an increase in temperature was first proposed by the Swedish chemist Svante Arrhenius in 1896, but climate change did not transpire as a political issue until the 1990s. It took many years for this particular issue to attract any type of attention.\n\nIn Europe, the notion of human influence on climate gained wide acceptance more rapidly than in the United States and other countries. A 2009 survey found that Europeans rated climate change as the second most serious problem facing the world, between \"poverty, the lack of food and drinking water\" and \"a major global economic downturn\". 87% of Europeans considered climate change to be a very serious or serious problem, while ten per cent did not consider it a serious problem.\n\nIn 2007 the BBC announced the cancellation of a planned television special Planet Relief, which would have highlighted the global warming issue and included a mass electrical switch-off. The editor of BBC's Newsnight current affairs show said: \"It is absolutely not the BBC's job to save the planet. I think there are a lot of people who think that, but it must be stopped.\" Author Mark Lynas said \"The only reason why this became an issue is that there is a small but vociferous group of extreme right-wing climate 'sceptics' lobbying against taking action, so the BBC is behaving like a coward and refusing to take a more consistent stance.\"\n\nThe authors of the 2010 book \"Merchants of Doubt\" provide documentation for the assertion that professional deniers have tried to sow seeds of doubt in public opinion in order to halt any meaningful social or political progress to reduce the impact of human carbon emissions. The fact that only half of the American population believe that global warming is caused by human activity could be seen as a victory for these deniers. One of the authors' main arguments is that most prominent scientists who have been voicing opposition to the near-universal consensus are being funded by industries, such as automotive and oil, that stand to lose money by government actions to regulate greenhouse gases. \n\nA compendium of poll results on public perceptions about global warming is below.\n\nIn 2007 a report on public perceptions in the United Kingdom by Ipsos MORI reported that\n\nThe Canadian science broadcaster and environmental activist, David Suzuki, reports that focus groups organized by the David Suzuki Foundation in 2006 showed that the public has a poor understanding of the science behind global warming. This is despite publicity through different means, including the films \"An Inconvenient Truth\" and \"The 11th Hour\".\n\nAn example of the poor understanding is public confusion between global warming and ozone depletion or other environmental problems.\n\nA 15-nation poll conducted in 2006 by Pew Global found that there \"is a substantial gap in concern over global warming—roughly two-thirds of Japanese (66%) and Indians (65%) say they personally worry a great deal about global warming. Roughly half of the populations of Spain (51%) and France (46%) also express great concern over global warming, based on those who have heard about the issue. But there is no evidence of alarm over global warming in either the United States or China—the two largest producers of greenhouse gases. Just 19% of Americans and 20% of the Chinese who have heard of the issue say they worry a lot about global warming—the lowest percentages in the 15 countries surveyed. Moreover, nearly half of Americans (47%) and somewhat fewer Chinese (37%) express little or no concern about the problem.\"\n\nA 47-nation poll by Pew Global Attitudes conducted in 2007 found, \"Substantial majorities 25 of 37 countries say global warming is a 'very serious' problem.\"\n\nThere are differences between the opinion of scientists and that of the general public. A 2009 poll in the US by Pew Research Center found \"[w]hile 84% of scientists say the earth is getting warmer because of human activity such as burning fossil fuels, just 49% of the public agrees\". A 2010 poll in the UK for the BBC showed \"Climate scepticism on the rise\". Robert Watson found this \"very disappointing\" and said \"We need the public to understand that climate change is serious so they will change their habits and help us move towards a low carbon economy.\"\n\nA 2012 Canadian poll found that 32% of Canadians said they believe climate change is happening because of human activity, while 54% said they believe it’s because of human activity and partially due to natural climate variation. 9% believe climate change is occurring due to natural climate variation, and only 2% said they don't believe climate change is occurring at all.\n\nMany of the critics of the consensus view on global warming have disagreed, in whole or part, with the scientific consensus regarding other issues, particularly those relating to environmental risks, such as ozone depletion, DDT, and passive smoking. Chris Mooney, author of \"The Republican War on Science\", has argued that the appearance of overlapping groups of skeptical scientists, commentators and think tanks in seemingly unrelated controversies results from an organized attempt to replace scientific analysis with political ideology. Mooney says that the promotion of doubt regarding issues that are politically, but not scientifically, controversial became increasingly prevalent under the George W. Bush administration, which, he says, regularly distorted and/or suppressed scientific research to further its own political aims. This is also the subject of a 2004 book by environmental lawyer Robert F. Kennedy, Jr. titled \"Crimes Against Nature: How George W. Bush and Corporate Pals are Plundering the Country and Hijacking Our Democracy\" (ISBN 978-0060746872). Another book on this topic is \"The Assault on Reason\" by former Vice President of the United States Al Gore. Earlier instances of this trend are also covered in the book \"The Heat Is On\" by Ross Gelbspan. \n\nSome critics of the scientific consensus on global warming have argued that these issues should not be linked and that reference to them constitutes an unjustified ad hominem attack. Political scientist Roger Pielke, Jr., responding to Mooney, has argued that science is inevitably intertwined with politics.\n\nIn 2015, according to \"The New York Times\" and others, oil companies knew that burning oil and gas could cause global warming since the 1970s but, nonetheless, funded deniers for years.\n\nThe finding that the climate has warmed in recent decades and that human activities are producing global climate change has been endorsed by every national science academy that has issued a statement on climate change, including the science academies of all of the major industrialized countries.\n\nAttribution of recent climate change discusses how global warming is attributed to anthropogenic greenhouse gases (GHGs).\n\nScientific consensus is normally achieved through communication at conferences, publication in the scientific literature, replication (reproducible results by others), and peer review. In the case of global warming, many governmental reports, the media in many countries, and environmental groups, have stated that there is virtually unanimous scientific agreement that human-caused global warming is real and poses a serious concern. According to the United States National Research Council,\nAmong opponents of the mainstream scientific assessment, some say that while there is agreement that humans do have an effect on climate, there is no universal agreement about the quantitative magnitude of anthropogenic global warming (AGW) relative to natural forcings and its harm to benefit ratio. Other opponents assert that some kind of ill-defined \"consensus argument\" is being used, and then dismiss this by arguing that science is based on facts rather than consensus. Some highlight the dangers of focusing on only one viewpoint in the context of what they say is unsettled science, or point out that science is based on facts and not on opinion polls or consensus.\n\nDennis T. Avery, a food policy analyst at the Hudson Institute, wrote an article titled \"500 Scientists Whose Research Contradicts Man-Made Global Warming Scares\" published in 2007 by The Heartland Institute. The list was immediately called into question for misunderstanding and distorting the conclusions of many of the named studies and citing outdated, flawed studies that had long been abandoned. Many of the scientists included in the list demanded their names be removed. The Heartland Institute refused these requests, stating that the scientists \"have no right—legally or ethically—to demand that their names be removed from a bibliography composed by researchers with whom they disagree\" despite the aforementioned falsification and refutation of much of the list.\n\nA 2010 paper in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences analysed \"1,372 climate researchers and their publication and citation data to show that (i) 97–98% of the climate researchers most actively publishing in the field support the tenets of ACC [anthropogenic climate change] outlined by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, and (ii) the relative climate expertise and scientific prominence of the researchers unconvinced of ACC are substantially below that of the convinced researchers\". Judith Curry has said \"This is a completely unconvincing analysis\", whereas Naomi Oreskes said that the paper shows \"the vast majority of working [climate] research scientists are in agreement [on climate change]... Those who don't agree, are, unfortunately—and this is hard to say without sounding elitist—mostly either not actually climate researchers or not very productive researchers.\" Jim Prall, one of the coauthors of the study, acknowledged \"it would be helpful to have lukewarm [as] a third category.\"\n\nA 2013 study published in the peer-reviewed journal \"Environmental Research Letters\" analyzed 11,944 abstracts from papers published in the peer-reviewed scientific literature between 1991 and 2011, identified by searching the ISI Web of Science citation index engine for the text strings \"global climate change\" or \"global warming\". The authors found that 3974 of the abstracts expressed a position on anthropogenic global warming, and that 97.1% of those endorsed the consensus that humans are causing global warming. The authors found that of the 11,944 abstracts, 3896 endorsed that consensus, 7930 took no position on it, 78 rejected the consensus, and 40 expressed uncertainty about it.\n\nIn 2014 a letter from 52 leading skeptics was published by the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry supporting the scientific consensus and asking the media to stop referring to deniers as \"skeptics.\" The letter clarified the skeptical opinion on climate and denial: \"As scientific skeptics, we are well aware of political efforts to undermine climate science by those who deny reality but do not engage in scientific research or consider evidence that their deeply held opinions are wrong. The most appropriate word to describe the behavior of those individuals is 'denial'. Not all individuals who call themselves climate change skeptics are deniers. But virtually all deniers have falsely branded themselves as skeptics. By perpetrating this misnomer, journalists have granted undeserved credibility to those who reject science and scientific inquiry.\"\n\nThe \"standard\" view of climate change has come to be defined by the reports of the IPCC, which is supported by many other science academies and scientific organizations. In 2001, sixteen of the world's national science academies made a joint statement on climate change, and gave their support for the IPCC.\n\nOpponents have generally attacked either the IPCC's processes, people or the Synthesis and Executive summaries; the full reports attract less attention. Some of the controversy and criticism has originated from experts invited by the IPCC to submit reports or serve on its panels. For example, Richard Lindzen has publicly dissented from IPCC positions.\n\nChristopher Landsea, a hurricane researcher, said of \"the part of the IPCC to which my expertise is relevant\" that \"I personally cannot in good faith continue to contribute to a process that I view as both being motivated by pre-conceived agendas and being scientifically unsound,\" because of comments made at a press conference by Kevin Trenberth of which Landsea disapproved. Trenberth said \"Landsea's comments were not correct\"; the IPCC replied \"individual scientists can do what they wish in their own rights, as long as they are not saying anything on behalf of the IPCC\" and offered to include Landsea in the review phase of the AR4. Roger Pielke, Jr. commented \"Both Landsea and Trenberth can and should feel vindicated... the IPCC accurately reported the state of scientific understandings of tropical cyclones and climate change in its recent summary for policy makers.\"\n\nIn 2005, the House of Lords Economics Committee wrote, \"We have some concerns about the objectivity of the IPCC process, with some of its emissions scenarios and summary documentation apparently influenced by political considerations.\" It doubted the high emission scenarios and said that the IPCC had \"played-down\" what the committee called \"some positive aspects of global warming\". The main statements of the House of Lords Economics Committee were rejected in the response made by the United Kingdom government and by the Stern Review.\n\nSpeaking to the difficulty of establishing scientific consensus on the precise extent of human action on climate change, John Christy, a contributing author, wrote:\n\nOn 10 December 2008, a report was released by the U.S. Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works Minority members, under the leadership of the Senate's most vocal global warming skeptic Jim Inhofe. The timing of the report coincided with the UN global warming conference in Poznań, Poland. It says it summarizes scientific dissent from the IPCC. Many of its statements about the numbers of individuals listed in the report, whether they are actually scientists, and whether they support the positions attributed to them, have been disputed.\n\nWhile some critics have argued that the IPCC overstates likely global warming, others have made the opposite criticism. David Biello, writing in the Scientific American, argues that, because of the need to secure consensus among governmental representatives, the IPCC reports give conservative estimates of the likely extent and effects of global warming. \"Science\" editor Brooks Hanson states in a 2010 editorial: \"The IPCC reports have underestimated the pace of climate change while overestimating societies' abilities to curb greenhouse gas emissions.\" Climate scientist James E. Hansen argues that the IPCC's conservativeness seriously underestimates the risk of sea-level rise on the order of meters—enough to inundate many low-lying areas, such as the southern third of Florida. Roger A. Pielke Sr. has also stated \"Humans are significantly altering the global climate, but in a variety of diverse ways beyond the radiative effect of carbon dioxide. The IPCC assessments have been too conservative in recognizing the importance of these human climate forcings as they alter regional and global climate.\"\n\nHenderson-Sellers has collected comments from IPCC authors in a 2007 workshop revealing a number of concerns. She concluded, \"Climate change research entered a new and different regime with the publication of the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report. There is no longer any question about \"whether\" human activities are changing the climate; instead research must tackle the urgent questions of: \"how fast?\"; \"with what impacts?'; and \"what responses are needed?\"\"\n\nAttribution of recent climate change discusses the evidence for recent global warming. Correlation of and temperature is not part of this evidence. Nonetheless, one argument against global warming says that rising levels of carbon dioxide () and other greenhouse gases (GHGs) do not correlate with global warming.\n\nAs noted above, climate models are only able to simulate the temperature record of the past century when GHG forcing is included, being consistent with the findings of the IPCC which has stated that: \"Greenhouse gas forcing, largely the result of human activities, has very likely caused most of the observed global warming over the last 50 years\"\n\nThe \"standard\" set of scenarios for future atmospheric greenhouse gases are the IPCC SRES scenarios. The purpose of the range of scenarios is not to predict what exact course the future of emissions will take, but what it may take under a range of possible population, economic and societal trends. Climate models can be run using any of the scenarios as inputs to illustrate the different outcomes for climate change. No one scenario is officially preferred, but in practice the \"A1b\" scenario roughly corresponding to 1%/year growth in atmospheric is often used for modelling studies.\n\nThere is debate about the various scenarios for fossil fuel consumption. Global warming skeptic Fred Singer stated \"some good experts believe\" that atmospheric concentration will not double since economies are becoming less reliant on carbon.\n\nHowever, the Stern report,\nlike many other reports, notes the past correlation between emissions and economic growth and then extrapolates using a \"business as usual\" scenario to predict GDP growth and hence levels, concluding that:\n\nIncreasing scarcity of fossil fuels alone will not stop emissions growth in time. The stocks of hydrocarbons that are profitable to extract are more than enough to take the world to levels of well beyond 750 ppm with very dangerous consequences for climate change impacts.\nAccording to a 2006 paper from Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, \"the earth would warm by 8 degrees Celsius (14.4 degrees Fahrenheit) if humans use the entire planet's available fossil fuels by the year 2300.\"\n\nOn 12 November 2015, NASA scientists reported that human-made carbon dioxide (CO) continues to increase above levels not seen in hundreds of thousands of years: currently, about half of the carbon dioxide released from the burning of fossil fuels remains in the atmosphere and is not absorbed by vegetation and the oceans.\n\nScientists opposing the mainstream scientific assessment of global warming express varied opinions concerning the cause of global warming. Some say only that it has not yet been ascertained whether humans are the primary cause of global warming; others attribute global warming to natural variation; ocean currents; increased solar activity or cosmic rays. The consensus position is that solar radiation may have increased by 0.12 W/m since 1750, compared to 1.6 W/m for the net anthropogenic forcing. The TAR said, \"The combined change in radiative forcing of the two major natural factors (solar variation and volcanic aerosols) is estimated to be negative for the past two, and possibly the past four, decades.\" The AR4 makes no direct assertions on the recent role of solar forcing, but the previous statement is consistent with the AR4's figure 4.\n\nA few studies say that the present level of solar activity is historically high as determined by sunspot activity and other factors. Solar activity could affect climate either by variation in the Sun's output or, more speculatively, by an indirect effect on the amount of cloud formation. Solanki and co-workers suggest that solar activity for the last 60 to 70 years may be at its highest level in 8,000 years; Muscheler \"et al.\" disagree, suggesting that other comparably high levels of activity have occurred several times in the last few thousand years.\nMuscheler \"et al.\" concluded \"solar activity reconstructions tell us that only a minor fraction of the recent global warming can be explained by the variable Sun.\" Solanki \"et al.\" concluded \"that solar variability is unlikely to have been the dominant cause of the strong warming during the past three decades\", and \"at the most 30% of the strong warming since then can be of solar origin\".\n\nAnother point of controversy is the correlation of temperature with solar variation.\n\nMike Lockwood and Claus Fröhlich reject the statement that the warming observed in the global mean surface temperature record since about 1850 is the result of solar variations. Lockwood and Fröhlich conclude, \"the observed rapid rise in global mean temperatures seen after 1985 cannot be ascribed to solar variability, whichever of the mechanisms is invoked and no matter how much the solar variation is amplified.\"\n\nThe hiatus in warming from the 1940s to 1960s is generally attributed to cooling effect of sulphate aerosols. More recently, this forcing has (relatively) declined, which may have enhanced warming, though the effect is regionally varying. See global dimming. Another example of this is in Ruckstuhl's paper who found a 60% reduction in aerosol concentrations over Europe causing solar brightening:\n\n[...] the direct aerosol effect had an approximately five times larger impact on climate forcing than the indirect aerosol and other cloud effects. The overall aerosol and cloud induced surface climate forcing is ~ 1 W m decade and has most probably strongly contributed to the recent rapid warming in Europe.\n\nThere have been attempts to raise public controversy over the accuracy of the instrumental temperature record on the basis of the urban heat island effect, the quality of the surface station network, and assertions that there have been unwarranted adjustments to the temperature record.\n\nWeather stations that are used to compute global temperature records are not evenly distributed over the planet. There were a small number of weather stations in the 1850s, and the number didn't reach the current 3000+ until the 1951 to 1990 period\n\nThe 2001 IPCC Third Assessment Report (TAR) acknowledged that the urban heat island is an important \"local\" effect, but cited analyses of historical data indicating that the effect of the urban heat island on the \"global\" temperature trend is no more than 0.05 °C (0.09 °F) degrees through 1990.\nPeterson (2003) found no difference between the warming observed in urban and rural areas.\n\nParker (2006) found that there was no difference in warming between calm and windy nights. Since the urban heat island effect is strongest for calm nights and is weak or absent on windy nights, this was taken as evidence that global temperature trends are not significantly contaminated by urban effects. Pielke and Matsui published a paper disagreeing with Parker's conclusions.\n\nIn 2005, Roger A. Pielke and Stephen McIntyre criticized the US instrumental temperature record and adjustments to it, and Pielke and others criticized the poor quality siting of a number of weather stations in the United States. In 2007, Anthony Watts began a volunteer effort to photographically document the siting quality of these stations. The \"Journal of Geophysical Research – Atmospheres\" subsequently published a study by Menne et al. which examined the record of stations picked out by Watts' Surfacestations.org and found that, if anything, the poorly sited stations showed a slight cool bias rather than the warm bias which Watts had anticipated.\n\nThe Berkeley Earth Surface Temperature group carried out an independent assessment of land temperature records, which examined issues raised by skeptics, such as the urban heat island effect, poor station quality, and the risk of data selection bias. The preliminary results, made public in October 2011, found that these factors had not biased the results obtained by NOAA, the Hadley Centre together with the Climatic Research Unit (HadCRUT) and NASA's GISS in earlier studies. The group also confirmed that over the past 50 years the land surface warmed by 0.911 °C, and their results closely matched those obtained from these earlier studies. The four papers they had produced had been submitted for peer review.\n\nGeneral circulation models and basic physical considerations predict that in the tropics the temperature of the troposphere should increase more rapidly than the temperature of the surface. A 2006 report to the U.S. Climate Change Science Program noted that models and observations agreed on this amplification for monthly and interannual time scales but not for decadal time scales in most observed data sets. Improved measurement and analysis techniques have reconciled this discrepancy: corrected buoy and satellite surface temperatures are slightly cooler and corrected satellite and radiosonde measurements of the tropical troposphere are slightly warmer. Satellite temperature measurements show that tropospheric temperatures are increasing with \"rates similar to those of the surface temperature\", leading the IPCC to conclude that this discrepancy is reconciled.\n\nBefore humans learned to record the temperature of earth's climate system, various biological and geological processes left clues to past climate conditions. The analysis of these clues is the focus of the science of paleoclimatology. The field still has a variety of uncertainties.\n\nThere has been a public dispute regarding the apparent contradiction in the observed behavior of Antarctica, as opposed to the global rise in temperatures measured elsewhere in the world. This became part of the public debate in the global warming controversy, particularly between advocacy groups of both sides in the public arena, as well as the popular media.\n\nIn contrast to the popular press, there is no evidence of a corresponding controversy in the scientific community. Observations unambiguously show the Antarctic Peninsula to be warming. The trends elsewhere show both warming and cooling but are smaller and dependent on season and the timespan over which the trend is computed. A study released in 2009, combined historical weather station data with satellite measurements to deduce past temperatures over large regions of the continent, and these temperatures indicate an overall warming trend. One of the paper's authors stated \"We now see warming is taking place on all seven of the earth's continents in accord with what models predict as a response to greenhouse gases.\" According to 2011 paper by Ding, et al., \"The Pacific sector of Antarctica, including both the Antarctic Peninsula and continental West Antarctica, has experienced substantial warming in the past 30 years.\"\n\nThis controversy began with the misinterpretation of the results of a 2002 paper by Doran et al., which found \"Although previous reports suggest slight recent continental warming, our spatial analysis of Antarctic meteorological data demonstrates a net cooling on the Antarctic continent between 1966 and 2000, particularly during summer and autumn.\" Later the controversy was popularized by Michael Crichton's 2004 fiction novel State of Fear, who advocated skepticism in global warming. This novel has a docudrama plot based upon the idea that there is a deliberately alarmist conspiracy behind global warming activism. One of the characters argues \"data show that one relatively small area called the Antarctic Peninsula is melting and calving huge icebergs... but the continent as a whole is getting colder, and the ice is getting thicker.\" As a basis for this plot twist, Crichton cited the peer reviewed scientific article by Doran, et al. Peter Doran, the lead author of the paper cited by Crichton, stated \"... our results have been misused as 'evidence' against global warming by Crichton in his novel 'State of Fear'... 'Our study did find that 58 percent of Antarctica cooled from 1966 to 2000. But during that period, the rest of the continent was warming. And climate models created since our paper was published have suggested a link between the lack of significant warming in Antarctica and the ozone hole over that continent.\"\n\nAs defined by the IPCC, climate sensitivity is the \"equilibrium temperature rise that would occur for a doubling of concentration above pre-industrial levels\". In its 2007 Fourth Assessment Report, IPCC said that climate sensitivity is \"likely to be in the range 2 to 4.5 °C with a best estimate of about 3 °C\".\n\nUsing a combination of surface temperature history and ocean heat content, Stephen E. Schwartz has proposed an estimate of climate sensitivity of 1.9 ± 1.0 K for doubled ., revised upwards from 1.1 ± 0.5 K. Grant Foster, James Annan, Gavin Schmidt, and Michael E. Mann argue that there are errors in both versions of Schwartz's analysis. Petr Chylek and co-authors have also proposed low climate sensitivity to doubled , estimated to be 1.6 K ± 0.4 K.\n\nIn January 2013 widespread publicity was given to work led by Terje Berntsen of the University of Oslo, Julia Hargreaves of the Research Institute for Global Change in Yokohama, and Nic Lewis, an independent climate scientist, which reportedly found lower climate sensitivities than IPCC estimates and the suggestion that there is a 90% probability that doubling emissions will increase temperatures by lower values than those estimated by the climate models used by the IPCC was featured in news outlets including \"The Economist\". This premature announcement came from a preliminary news release about a study which had not yet been peer reviewed. The Center for International Climate and Environmental Research, Oslo (CICERO) issued a statement that they were involved with the relevant research project, and the news story was based on a report submitted to the research council which included both published and unpublished material. The highly publicised figures came from work still undergoing peer review, and CICERO would wait until they had been published in a journal before disseminating the results.\n\nIn 2001, Richard Lindzen proposed a system of compensating meteorological processes involving clouds that tend to stabilize climate change; he tagged this the \"Iris hypothesis, or \"Infrared Iris\". This work has been discussed in a number of papers\n\nRoy Spencer \"et al.\" suggested \"a net reduction in radiative input into the ocean-atmosphere system\" in tropical intraseasonal oscillations \"may potentially support\" the idea of an \"Iris\" effect, although they point out that their work is concerned with much shorter time scales.\n\nOther analyses have found that the iris effect is a \"positive\" feedback rather than the negative feedback proposed by Lindzen.\n\nRoy Spencer hypothesized in 2008 that there is an \"internal radiative forcing\" affecting climate variability,\n\n[...] mixing up of cause and effect when observing natural climate variability can lead to the mistaken conclusion that the climate system is more sensitive to greenhouse gas emissions than it really is. [...] it provides a quantitative mechanism for the (minority) view that global warming is mostly a manifestation of natural internal climate variability.\n\n[...] low frequency, internal radiative forcing amounting to little more than 1 W/m, assumed to be proportional to a weighted average of the southern oscillation and Pacific decadal oscillation indices since 1900, produces ocean temperature behavior similar to that observed: warming from 1900 to 1940, then slight cooling through the 1970s, then resumed warming up to the present, as well as 70% of the observed centennial temperature trend.\n\nJames Hansen's 1984 climate model projections versus observed temperatures are updated each year by Dr Mikako Sato of Columbia University. The RealClimate website provides an annual update comparing both Hansen's 1988 model projections and the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report (AR4) climate model projections with observed temperatures recorded by GISS and HadCRUT. The measured temperatures show continuing global warming.\n\nConventional projections of future temperature rises depend on estimates of future anthropogenic GHG emissions (see SRES), those positive and negative climate change feedbacks that have so far been incorporated into the models, and the climate sensitivity. Models referenced by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) predict that global temperatures are likely to increase by 1.1 to 6.4 °C (2.0 to 11.5 °F) between 1990 and 2100. Others have proposed that temperature increases may be higher than IPCC estimates. One theory is that the climate may reach a \"tipping point\" where positive feedback effects lead to runaway global warming; such feedbacks include decreased reflection of solar radiation as sea ice melts, exposing darker seawater, and the potential release of large volumes of methane from thawing permafrost. In 1959 Dr. Bert Bolin, in a speech to the National Academy of Sciences, predicted that by the year 2000 there would be a 25% increase in carbon dioxide in the atmosphere compared to the levels in 1859. The actual increase by 2000 was about 29%.\n\nDavid Orrell or Henk Tennekes say that climate change cannot be accurately predicted. Orrell says that the range of future increase in temperature suggested by the IPCC rather represents a social consensus in the climate community, but adds \"we are having a dangerous effect on the climate\".\n\nA 2007 study by David Douglass and coworkers concluded that the 22 most commonly used global climate models used by the IPCC were unable to accurately predict accelerated warming in the troposphere although they did match actual surface warming, concluding \"projections of future climate based on these models should be viewed with much caution\". This result went against a similar study of 19 models which found that discrepancies between model predictions and actual temperature were likely due to measurement errors.\n\nIn a NASA report published in January 2013, Hansen and Sato noted \"the 5-year mean global temperature has been flat for a decade, which we interpret as a combination of natural variability and a slowdown in the growth rate of the net climate forcing.\" Ed Hawkins, of the University of Reading, stated that the \"surface temperatures since 2005 are already at the low end of the range of projections derived from 20 climate models. If they remain flat, they will fall outside the models' range within a few years.\" Using the long-term temperature trends for the earth scientists and statisticians conclude that it continues to warm through time.\n\nThe IPCC states it has increased confidence in forecasts coming from General Circulation Models or GCMs. Chapter 8 of AR4 reads:\n\"There is considerable confidence that climate models provide credible quantitative estimates of future climate change, particularly at continental scales and above. This confidence comes from the foundation of the models in accepted physical principles and from their ability to reproduce observed features of current climate and past climate changes. Confidence in model estimates is higher for some climate variables (e.g., temperature) than for others (e.g., precipitation). Over several decades of development, models have consistently provided a robust and unambiguous picture of significant climate warming in response to increasing greenhouse gases.\"\n\nCertain scientists, skeptics and otherwise, believe this confidence in the models' ability to predict future climate is not earned.\n\nFollowing the (then) record low of the arctic sea ice extend in 2007, Mark Serreze, the director of US National Snow and Ice Data Center, stated \"If you asked me a couple of years ago when the Arctic could lose all of its ice then I would have said 2100, or 2070 maybe. But now I think that 2030 is a reasonable estimate.\"\nIn 2012, during another record low, Peter Wadhams of Cambridge University predicted a possible final collapse of Arctic sea ice in summer months around 2016.\n\nAntarctic and Arctic sea ice extent are available on a daily basis from the National Snow & Ice Data Center.\n\nScientific journals and funding agencies generally require authors of peer-reviewed research to provide information on archives of data and share sufficient data and methods necessary for a scientific expert on the topic to reproduce the work.\n\nIn political controversy over the 1998 and 1999 historic temperature reconstructions widely publicised as the \"hockey stick graphs\", Mann, Bradley and Hughes as authors of the studies were sent letters on 23 June 2005 from Rep. Joe Barton, chairman of the House Committee on Energy and Commerce and Ed Whitfield, Chairman of the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, demanding full records on the research.\nThe letters told the scientist to provide not just data and methods, but also personal information about their finances and careers, information about grants provided to the institutions they had worked for, and the exact computer codes used to generate their results.\n\nSherwood Boehlert, chairman of the House Science Committee, told his fellow Republican Joe Barton it was a \"misguided and illegitimate investigation\" seemingly intended to \"intimidate scientists rather than to learn from them, and to substitute congressional political review for scientific review\". The U.S. National Academy of Sciences (NAS) president Ralph J. Cicerone wrote to Barton proposing that the NAS should appoint an independent panel to investigate. Barton dismissed this offer.\n\nOn 15 July, Mann wrote giving his detailed response to Barton and Whitfield. He emphasised that the full data and necessary methods information was already publicly available in full accordance with National Science Foundation (NSF) requirements, so that other scientists had been able to reproduce their work. NSF policy was that computer codes are considered the intellectual property of researchers and are not subject to disclosure, but notwithstanding these property rights, the program used to generate the original MBH98 temperature reconstructions had been made available at the Mann et al. public FTP site.\n\nMany scientists protested about Barton's demands. Alan I. Leshner wrote to him on behalf of the American Association for the Advancement of Science stating that the letters gave \"the impression of a search for some basis on which to discredit these particular scientists and findings, rather than a search for understanding\", He stated that Mann, Bradley and Hughes had given out their full data and descriptions of methods.\nA \"Washington Post\" editorial on 23 July which described the investigation as harassment quoted Bradley as saying it was \"intrusive, far-reaching and intimidating\", and Alan I. Leshner of the AAAS describing it as unprecedented in the 22 years he had been a government scientist; he thought it could \"have a chilling effect on the willingness of people to work in areas that are politically relevant\". Congressman Boehlert said the investigation was as \"at best foolhardy\" with the tone of the letters showing the committee's inexperience in relation to science.\n\nBarton was given support by global warming sceptic Myron Ebell of the Competitive Enterprise Institute, who said \"We've always wanted to get the science on trial ... we would like to figure out a way to get this into a court of law,\" and \"this could work\". In his \"Junk Science\" column on Fox News, Steven Milloy said Barton's inquiry was reasonable. In September 2005 David Legates alleged in a newspaper op-ed that the issue showed climate scientists not abiding by data access requirements and suggested that legislators might ultimately take action to enforce them.\n\nIn the U.S. global warming is often a partisan political issue. Republicans tend to oppose action against a threat that they regard as unproven, while Democrats tend to support actions that they believe will reduce global warming and its effects through the control of greenhouse gas emissions. A bipartisan measure was introduced in the US House of Representatives as recently as 2007.\n\nClimatologist Kevin E. Trenberth stated:\n\nThe SPM [Summary for policymakers] was approved line by line by governments[...] The argument here is that the scientists determine what can be said, but the governments determine how it can best be said. Negotiations occur over wording to ensure accuracy, balance, clarity of message, and relevance to understanding and policy. The IPCC process is dependent on the good will of the participants in producing a balanced assessment. However, in Shanghai, it appeared that there were attempts to blunt, and perhaps obfuscate, the messages in the report, most notably by Saudi Arabia. This led to very protracted debates over wording on even bland and what should be uncontroversial text... The most contentious paragraph in the IPCC (2001) SPM was the concluding one on attribution. After much debate, the following was carefully crafted: \"In the light of new evidence, and taking into account the remaining uncertainties, most of the observed warming over the last 50 years is likely to have been due to the increase in greenhouse-gas concentrations.\"\n\nAs more evidence has become available over the existence of global warming debate has moved to further controversial issues, including:\n\n\nThe single largest issue is the importance of a few degrees rise in temperature:\nMost people say, \"A few degrees? So what? If I change my thermostat a few degrees, I'll live fine.\" ... [The] point is that one or two degrees is about the experience that we have had in the last 10,000 years, the era of human civilization. There haven't been—globally averaged, we're talking—fluctuations of more than a degree or so. So we're actually getting into uncharted territory from the point of view of the relatively benign climate of the last 10,000 years, if we warm up more than a degree or two. (Stephen H. Schneider)\n\nThe other point that leads to major controversy—because it could have significant economic impacts—is whether action (usually, restrictions on the use of fossil fuels to reduce carbon-dioxide emissions) should be taken now, or in the near future; and whether those restrictions would have any meaningful effect on global temperature.\n\nBecause of the economic ramifications of such restrictions, there are those, including the Cato Institute, a libertarian think tank, who argue that the negative economic effects of emission controls outweigh the environmental benefits. They state that even if global warming is caused solely by the burning of fossil fuels, restricting their use would have more damaging effects on the world economy than the increases in global temperature.\n\nThe linkage between coal, electricity, and economic growth in the United States is as clear as it can be. And it is required for the way we live, the way we work, for our economic success, and for our future. Coal-fired electricity generation. It is necessary.(Fred Palmer, President of Western Fuels Association)\n\nConversely, others argue that early action to reduce emissions would help avoid much greater economic costs later, and would reduce the risk of catastrophic, irreversible change. In his December 2006 book, \"Hell and High Water\", Joseph J. Romm\ndiscusses the urgency to act and the sad fact that America is refusing to do so...\n\nOn a local or regional level, some specific effects of global warming might be considered beneficial.\n\nCouncil on Foreign Relations senior fellow Walter Russell Mead argues that the 2009 Copenhagen Summit failed because environmentalists have changed from \"Bambi to Godzilla\". According to Mead, environmentalist used to represent the skeptical few who made valid arguments against big government programs which tried to impose simple but massive solutions on complex situations. Environmentalists' more recent advocacy for big economic and social intervention against global warming, according to Mead, has made them, \"the voice of the establishment, of the tenured, of the technocrats\" and thus has lost them the support of a public which is increasingly skeptical of global warming.\n\nVarious campaigns such as 350.org and many Greenpeace projects have been started in an effort to push the world's leaders towards changing laws and policies that would effectively reduce the world's carbon emissions and use of non-renewable energy resources.\n\nThe Kyoto protocol is the most prominent international agreement on climate change, and is also highly controversial. Some argue that it goes too far or not nearly far enough in restricting emissions of greenhouse gases. Another area of controversy is the fact that China and India, the world's two most populous countries, both ratified the protocol but are not required to reduce or even limit the growth of carbon emissions under the present agreement even though when listed by greenhouse gas emissions per capita, they have rankings of 121st largest per capita emitter at 3.9 Tonnes of e and 162nd largest per capita emitter at 1.8 Tonnes of e respectively, compared with for example the US at position of the 14th largest per capita e emitter at 22.9 Tonnes of e. Nevertheless, China is the world's second largest producer of greenhouse gas emissions, and India 4th (see: countries by greenhouse emissions). Various predictions see China overtaking the US in total greenhouse emissions between late 2007 and 2010, and according to many other estimates, this already occurred in 2006.\n\nAdditionally, high costs of decreasing emissions may cause significant production to move to countries that are not covered under the treaty, such as India and China, says Fred Singer. As these countries are less energy efficient, this scenario is said to cause additional carbon emissions.\n\nIn May 2010 the Hartwell Paper was published by the London School of Economics in collaboration with the University of Oxford. This paper was written by 14 academics from various disciplines in the sciences and humanities, and also some policies thinkers, and they argued that the Kyoto Protocol crashed in late 2009 and \"has failed to produce any discernable real world reductions in emissions of greenhouse gases in fifteen years.\" They argued that this failure opened an opportunity to set climate policy free from Kyoto and the paper advocates a controversial and piecemeal approach to decarbonization of the global economy. The Hartwell paper proposes, \"the organising principle of our effort should be the raising up of human dignity via three overarching objectives: ensuring energy access for all; ensuring that we develop in a manner that does not undermine the essential functioning of the Earth system; ensuring that our societies are adequately equipped to withstand the risks and dangers that come from all the vagaries of climate, whatever their cause may be\".\n\nThe only major developed nation which has signed but not ratified the Kyoto protocol is the US (see signatories). The countries with no official position on Kyoto are mainly African countries with underdeveloped scientific infrastructure or are oil producers .\n\nThe Global Climate Coalition was an industry coalition that funded several scientists who expressed skepticism about global warming. In the year 2000, several members left the coalition when they became the target of a national divestiture campaign run by John Passacantando and Phil Radford at Ozone Action. According to \"The New York Times\", when Ford Motor Company was the first company to leave the coalition, it was \"the latest sign of divisions within heavy industry over how to respond to global warming\". After that, between December, 1999 and early March, 2000, the GCC was deserted by Daimler-Chrysler, Texaco, energy firm the Southern Company and General Motors. The Global Climate Coalition closed in 2002, or in their own words, 'deactivated'.\n\nDocuments obtained by Greenpeace under the US Freedom of Information Act show that the Charles G. Koch Foundation gave climate change writer Willie Soon two grants totaling $175,000 in 2005/6 and again in 2010. Multiple grants to Soon from the American Petroleum Institute between 2001 and 2007 totalled $274,000, and from ExxonMobil totalled $335,000 between 2005 and 2010. Other coal and oil industry sources which funded him include the Mobil Foundation, the Texaco Foundation and the Electric Power Research Institute. Soon, acknowledging that he received this money, stated unequivocally that he has \"never been motivated by financial reward in any of my scientific research\". In February 2015, Greenpeace disclosed papers documenting that Soon failed to disclose to academic journals funding including more than $1.2 million from fossil fuel industry related interests including ExxonMobil, the American Petroleum Institute, the Charles G. Koch Charitable Foundation and the Southern Company. To investigate how widespread such hidden funding was, senators Barbara Boxer, Edward Markey and Sheldon Whitehouse wrote to a number of companies. Koch general counsel refused the request and said it would infringe the company's first amendment rights.\n\nThe Greenpeace research project ExxonSecrets, and George Monbiot writing in \"The Guardian\", as well as various academics, have linked several skeptical scientists—Fred Singer, Fred Seitz and Patrick Michaels—to organizations funded by ExxonMobil and Philip Morris for the purpose of promoting global warming skepticism. These organizations include the Cato Institute and the Heritage Foundation. Similarly, groups employing global warming skeptics, such as the George C. Marshall Institute, have been criticized for their ties to fossil fuel companies.\n\nOn 2 February 2007, \"The Guardian\" stated that Kenneth Green, a Visiting Scholar with AEI, had sent letters to scientists in the UK and the U.S., offering US$10,000 plus travel expenses and other incidental payments in return for essays with the purpose of \"highlight[ing] the strengths and weaknesses of the IPCC process\", specifically regarding the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report.\n\nA furor was raised when it was revealed that the Intermountain Rural Electric Association (an energy cooperative that draws a significant portion of its electricity from coal-burning power plants) donated $100,000 to Patrick Michaels and his group, New Hope Environmental Services, and solicited additional private donations from its members.\n\nThe Union of Concerned Scientists produced a report titled 'Smoke, Mirrors & Hot Air', that criticizes ExxonMobil for \"underwriting the most sophisticated and most successful disinformation campaign since the tobacco industry\" and for \"funnelling about $16 million between 1998 and 2005 to a network of ideological and advocacy organizations that manufacture uncertainty on the issue\". In 2006 Exxon said that it was no longer going to fund these groups though that statement has been challenged by Greenpeace.\n\nThe Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change, a skeptic group, when confronted about the funding of a video they put together ($250,000 for \"The Greening of Planet Earth\" from an oil company) stated, \"We applaud Western Fuels for their willingness to publicize a side of the story that we believe to be far more correct than what at one time was 'generally accepted'. But does this mean that they fund The Center? Maybe it means that we fund them!\"\n\nDonald Kennedy, editor-in-chief of \"Science\", has said that skeptics such as Michaels are lobbyists more than researchers, and \"I don't think it's unethical any more than most lobbying is unethical,\" he said. He said donations to skeptics amounts to \"trying to get a political message across\".\n\nGlobal warming skeptic Reid Bryson said in June 2007, \"There is a lot of money to be made in this... If you want to be an eminent scientist you have to have a lot of grad students and a lot of grants. You can't get grants unless you say, 'Oh global warming, yes, yes, carbon dioxide'.\" Similar positions have been advanced by University of Alabama, Huntsville climate scientist Roy Spencer, Spencer's University of Alabama, Huntsville colleague and IPCC contributor John Christy, University of London biogeographer Philip Stott, Accuracy in Media, and Ian Plimer in his 2009 book \"Heaven and Earth — Global Warming: The Missing Science\".\n\nRichard Lindzen, the Alfred P. Sloan Professor of Meteorology at MIT, said, \"[in] the winter of 1989 Reginald Newell, a professor of meteorology [at MIT], lost National Science Foundation funding for data analyses that were failing to show net warming over the past century.\" Lindzen also suggested that four other scientists \"apparently\" lost their funding or positions after questioning the scientific underpinnings of global warming. Lindzen himself has been the recipient of money from energy interests such as OPEC and the Western Fuels Association, including \"$2,500 a day for his consulting services\", as well as funding from US federal sources including the National Science Foundation, the Department of Energy, and NASA.\n\nIn recent years some skeptics have changed their positions regarding global warming. Ronald Bailey, author of \"Global Warming and Other Eco-Myths\" (published by the Competitive Enterprise Institute in 2002), stated in 2005, \"Anyone still holding onto the idea that there is no global warming ought to hang it up.\" By 2007, he wrote \"Details like sea level rise will continue to be debated by researchers, but if the debate over whether or not humanity is contributing to global warming wasn't over before, it is now... as the new IPCC Summary makes clear, climate change Pollyannaism is no longer looking very tenable.\"\n\n\"There are alternatives to its [the climate-change crusade's] insistence that the only appropriate policy response is steep and immediate emissions reductions... a greenhouse-gas-emissions cap ultimately would constrain energy production. A sensible climate policy would emphasize building resilience into our capacity to adapt to climate changes... we should consider strategies of adaptation to a changing climate. A rise in the sea level need not be the end of the world, as the Dutch have taught us.\" says Steven F. Hayward of American Enterprise Institute, a conservative think-tank. Hayward also advocates the use of \"orbiting mirrors to rebalance the amounts of solar radiation different parts of the earth receive\"—the space sunshade example of so-called geoengineering for solar radiation management.\n\nIn 2001 Richard Lindzen, asked whether it was necessary to try to reduce emissions, said that responses needed to be prioritised. \"You can't just say, 'No matter what the cost, and no matter how little the benefit, we'll do this'. If we truly believe in warming, then we've already decided we're going to adjust...The reason we adjust to things far better than Bangladesh is that we're richer. Wouldn't you think it makes sense to make sure we're as robust and wealthy as possible? And that the poor of the world are also as robust and wealthy as possible?\"\n\nOthers argue that if developing nations reach the wealth level of the United States this could greatly increase emissions and consumption of fossil fuels. Large developing nations such as India and China are predicted to be major emitters of greenhouse gases in the next few decades as their economies grow.\n\nThe conservative National Center for Policy Analysis whose \"Environmental Task Force\" contains a number of climate change skeptics including Sherwood Idso and S. Fred Singer\nsays, \"The growing consensus on climate change policies is that adaptation will protect present and future generations from climate-sensitive risks far more than efforts to restrict emissions.\"\n\nThe adaptation-only plan is also endorsed by oil companies like ExxonMobil, \"ExxonMobil's plan appears to be to stay the course and try to adjust when changes occur. The company's plan is one that involves adaptation, as opposed to leadership,\"\nsays this Ceres report.\n\nGregg Easterbrook characterized himself as having \"a long record of opposing alarmism\". In 2006, he stated, \"based on the data I'm now switching sides regarding global warming, from skeptic to convert.\"\n\nThe George W. Bush administration also voiced support for an adaptation-only policy in the US in 2002. \"In a stark shift for the Bush administration, the United States has sent a climate report [\"U.S. Climate Action Report 2002\"] to the United Nations detailing specific and far-reaching effects it says global warming will inflict on the American environment. In the report, the administration also for the first time places most of the blame for recent global warming on human actions—mainly the burning of fossil fuels that send heat-trapping greenhouse gases into the atmosphere.\" The report however \"does not propose any major shift in the administration's policy on greenhouse gases. Instead it recommends adapting to inevitable changes instead of making rapid and drastic reductions in greenhouse gases to limit warming.\" This position apparently precipitated a similar shift in emphasis at the COP 8 climate talks in New Delhi several months later, \"The shift satisfies the Bush administration, which has fought to avoid mandatory cuts in emissions for fear it would harm the economy. 'We're welcoming a focus on more of a balance on adaptation versus mitigation', said a senior American negotiator in New Delhi. 'You don't have enough money to do everything.'\" The White House emphasis on adaptation was not well received however:\n\nSome find this shift and attitude disingenuous and indicative of an inherent bias against prevention (i.e. reducing emissions/consumption) and for the prolonging of profits to the oil industry at the expense of the environment. \"Now that the dismissal of climate change is no longer fashionable, the professional deniers are trying another means of stopping us from taking action. It would be cheaper, they say, to wait for the impacts of climate change and then adapt to them\" says writer and environmental activist George Monbiot\nin an article addressing the supposed economic hazards of addressing climate change. Others argue that adaptation alone will not be sufficient.\nSee also Copenhagen Consensus.\n\nThough not emphasized to the same degree as mitigation, adaptation to a climate certain to change has been included as a necessary component in the discussion as early as 1992,\nand has been all along.\nHowever it was not to the \"exclusion\", advocated by the skeptics, of \"preventative\" mitigation efforts, and therein, say carbon cutting proponents, lies the difference.\n\nAnother highly debated potential climate change mitigation strategy is Cap and Trade due to its direct relationship with the economy.\n\nMany climate scientists state that they are put under enormous pressure to distort or hide any scientific results which suggest that human activity is to blame for global warming. A survey of climate scientists which was reported to the US House Oversight and Government Reform Committee in 2007 noted \"Nearly half of all respondents perceived or personally experienced pressure to eliminate the words 'climate change', 'global warming' or other similar terms from a variety of communications.\" These scientists were pressured to tailor their reports on global warming to fit the Bush administration's climate change scepticism. In some cases, this occurred at the request of former oil-industry lobbyist Phil Cooney, who worked for the American Petroleum Institute before becoming chief of staff at the White House Council on Environmental Quality (he resigned in 2005 before being hired by ExxonMobil). In June 2008, a report by NASA's Office of the Inspector General concluded that NASA staff appointed by the White House had censored and suppressed scientific data on global warming in order to protect the Bush administration from controversy close to the 2004 presidential election.\n\nU.S. officials, such as Philip Cooney, have repeatedly edited scientific reports from US government scientists, many of whom, such as Thomas Knutson, have been ordered to refrain from discussing climate change and related topics. Attempts to suppress scientific information on global warming and other issues have been described by journalist Chris Mooney in his book \"The Republican War on Science\".\n\nClimate scientist James E. Hansen, director of NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies, wrote in a widely cited \"New York Times\" article\nin 2006 that his superiors at the agency were trying to \"censor\" information \"going out to the public\". NASA denied this, saying that it was merely requiring that scientists make a distinction between personal, and official government, views in interviews conducted as part of work done at the agency. Several scientists working at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration have made similar complaints; once again, government officials said they were enforcing long-standing policies requiring government scientists to clearly identify personal opinions as such when participating in public interviews and forums.\n\nThe BBC's long-running current affairs series \"Panorama\" recently investigated the issue, and was told, \"scientific reports about global warming have been systematically changed and suppressed.\"\n\nScientists who agree with the consensus view have sometimes expressed concerns over what they view as sensationalism of global warming by interest groups and the press. For example, Mike Hulme, director of the Tyndall Centre for Climate Research, wrote how increasing use of pejorative terms like \"catastrophic\", \"chaotic\" and \"irreversible\", had altered the public discourse around climate change: \"This discourse is now characterised by phrases such as 'climate change is worse than we thought', that we are approaching 'irreversible tipping in the Earth's climate', and that we are 'at the point of no return'. I have found myself increasingly chastised by climate change campaigners when my public statements and lectures on climate change have not satisfied their thirst for environmental drama and exaggerated rhetoric.\"\n\nAccording to an Associated Press release on 30 January 2007,\n\nClimate scientists at seven government agencies say they have been subjected to political pressure aimed at downplaying the threat of global warming.\n\nThe groups presented a survey that shows two in five of the 279 climate scientists who responded to a questionnaire complained that some of their scientific papers had been edited in a way that changed their meaning. Nearly half of the 279 said in response to another question that at some point they had been told to delete reference to \"global warming\" or \"climate change\" from a report.\n\nCritics writing in \"The Wall Street Journal\" editorial page state that the survey\nwas itself unscientific.\n\nIn addition to the pressure from politicians, many prominent scientists working on climate change issues have reported increasingly severe harassment from members of the public. The harassment has taken several forms. The US FBI told ABC News that it was looking into a spike in threatening emails sent to climate scientists, while a white supremacist website posted pictures of several climate scientists with the word \"Jew\" next to each image. One climate scientist interviewed by ABC News had a dead animal dumped on his doorstep and now frequently has to travel with bodyguards.\n\nIn April 2010, Virginia Attorney General Ken Cuccinelli claimed that leading climate scientist Michael E. Mann had possibly violated state fraud laws, and without providing any evidence of wrongdoing, filed the Attorney General of Virginia's climate science investigation as a civil demand that the University of Virginia provide a wide range of records broadly related to five research grants Mann had obtained as an assistant professor at the university from 1999 to 2005. This litigation was widely criticized in the academic community as politically motivated and likely to have a chilling effect on future research. The university filed a court petition and the judge dismissed Cuccinelli's demand on the grounds that no justification had been shown for the investigation. Cuccinelli issued a revised subpoena, and appealed the case to the Virginia Supreme Court which ruled in March 2012 that Cuccinelli did not have the authority to make these demands. The outcome was hailed as a victory for academic freedom.\n\nExxon Mobil is also notorious for skewing scientific evidence through their private funding of scientific organizations. In 2002, Exxon Mobil contributed $10,000 to The Independent Institute and then $10,000 more in 2003. In 2003, The Independent Institute release a study that reported the evidence for imminent global warming found during the Clinton administration was based on now-dated satellite findings and wrote off the evidence and findings as a product of \"bad science\".\n\nThis is not the only consortium of skeptics that Exxon Mobil has supported financially. The George C. Marshall Institute received $630,000 in funding for climate change research from ExxonMobil between 1998 and 2005. Exxon Mobil also gave $472,000 in funding to The Board of Academic and Scientific Advisors for the Committee for a Constructive Tomorrow from 1998 to 2005. Dr. Frederick Seitz, well known as \"the godfather of global warming skepticism\", served as both Chairman Emeritus of The George C. Marshall Institute and a board member of the Committee for a Constructive Tomorrow from 1998 to 2005.\n\nSeveral lawsuits have been filed over global warming. For example, Massachusetts v. Environmental Protection Agency before the Supreme Court of the United States allowed the EPA to regulate greenhouse gases under the Clean Air Act. A similar approach was taken by California Attorney General Bill Lockyer who filed a lawsuit California v. General Motors Corp. to force car manufacturers to reduce vehicles' emissions of carbon dioxide. This lawsuit was found to lack legal merit and was tossed out. A third case, Comer v. Murphy Oil USA, Inc., a class action lawsuit filed by Gerald Maples, a trial attorney in Mississippi, in an effort to force fossil fuel and chemical companies to pay for damages caused by global warming. Described as a nuisance lawsuit, it was dismissed by District Court. However, the District Court's decision was overturned by the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, which instructed the District Court to reinstate several of the plaintiffs' climate change-related claims on 22 October 2009. The Sierra Club sued the U.S. government over failure to raise automobile fuel efficiency standards, and thereby decrease carbon dioxide emissions.\n\nIn a lawsuit organized by activist organization Our Children's Trust, a group of plaintiffs aged 8–19 sued the U. S. Federal Government, claiming \"the government has known for decades that carbon dioxide (CO) pollution has been causing catastrophic climate change and has failed to take necessary action to curtail fossil fuel emissions.\" On April 8, 2016, U. S. Magistrate Judge Thomas Coffin denied defendant's motion to dismiss, arguing plaintiffs have standing to sue because they will be disproportionately affected by the alleged damages. \"The intractability of the debates before Congress and state legislatures and the alleged valuing of short term economic interest despite the cost to human life,\" argued Coffin, \"necessitates a need for the courts to evaluate the constitutional parameters of the action or inaction taken by the government\".\n\n\n\n", "id": "13109", "title": "Global warming controversy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13111", "text": "George Dantzig\n\nGeorge Bernard Dantzig (November 8, 1914 – May 13, 2005) was an American mathematical scientist who made important contributions to operations research, computer science, economics, and statistics.\n\nDantzig is known for his development of the simplex algorithm, an algorithm for solving linear programming problems, and for his other work with linear programming. In statistics, Dantzig solved two open problems in statistical theory, which he had mistaken for homework after arriving late to a lecture by Jerzy Neyman.\n\nDantzig was the Professor Emeritus of Transportation Sciences and Professor of Operations Research and of Computer Science at Stanford.\n\nBorn in Portland, Oregon, George Bernard Dantzig was named after George Bernard Shaw, the Irish writer. His father, Tobias Dantzig, was a Baltic German mathematician and linguist, and his mother, Anja Dantzig (née Ourisson), was a French linguist. Dantzig's parents met during their study at the Sorbonne University in Paris, where Tobias studied mathematics under Henri Poincaré, after whom Dantzig's brother was named. The Dantzigs immigrated to the United States, where they settled in Portland, Oregon.\n\nEarly in the 1920s the Dantzig family moved from Baltimore to Washington. His mother became a linguist at the Library of Congress, and his father became a math tutor at the University of Maryland, College Park, Dantzig attended Powell Junior High School and Central High School; one of his friends there was Abraham Seidenberg, who also became a professional mathematician. By the time he reached high school he was already fascinated by geometry, and this interest was further nurtured by his father, challenging him with complicated problems, particularly in projective geometry.\n\nGeorge Dantzig received his B.S. from University of Maryland in 1936 in mathematics and physics, which is part of the University of Maryland College of Computer, Mathematical, and Natural Sciences. He earned his master's degree in mathematics from the University of Michigan in 1938. After a two-year period at the Bureau of Labor Statistics, he enrolled in the doctoral program in mathematics at the University of California, Berkeley, where he studied statistics under Jerzy Neyman.\n\nWith the outbreak of World War II, Dantzig took a leave of absence from the doctoral program at Berkeley to join the U.S. Air Force Office of Statistical Control. In 1946, he returned to Berkeley to complete the requirements of his program and received his Ph.D. that year. Although he had a faculty offer from Berkeley, he returned to the Air Force as mathematical advisor to the comptroller.\n\nIn 1952 Dantzig joined the mathematics division of the RAND Corporation. By 1960 he became a professor in the Department of Industrial Engineering at UC Berkeley, where he founded and directed the Operations Research Center. In 1966 he joined the Stanford faculty as Professor of Operations Research and of Computer Science. A year later, the Program in Operations Research became a full-fledged department. In 1973 he founded the Systems Optimization Laboratory (SOL) there. On a sabbatical leave that year, he headed the Methodology Group at the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) in Laxenburg, Austria. Later he became the C. A. Criley Professor of Transportation Sciences at Stanford, and kept going, well beyond his mandatory retirement in 1985.\n\nHe was a member of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Dantzig was the recipient of many honors, including the first John von Neumann Theory Prize in 1974, the National Medal of Science in 1975, an honorary doctorate from the University of Maryland, College Park in 1976. The Mathematical Programming Society honored Dantzig by creating the George B. Dantzig Prize, bestowed every three years since 1982 on one or two people who have made a significant impact in the field of mathematical programming.\n\nDantzig died on May 13, 2005, in his home in Stanford, California, of complications from diabetes and cardiovascular disease. He was 90 years old.\n\nFreund wrote further that \"through his research in mathematical theory, computation, economic analysis, and applications to industrial problems, [Dantzig] has contributed more than any other researcher to the remarkable development of linear programming\".\n\nDantzig's seminal work allows the airline industry, for example, to schedule crews and make fleet assignments. Based on his work tools are developed \"that shipping companies use to determine how many planes they need and where their delivery trucks should be deployed. The oil industry long has used linear programming in refinery planning, as it determines how much of its raw product should become different grades of gasoline and how much should be used for petroleum-based byproducts. It is used in manufacturing, revenue management, telecommunications, advertising, architecture, circuit design and countless other areas\".\n\nAn event in Dantzig's life became the origin of a famous story in 1939 while he was a graduate student at UC Berkeley. Near the beginning of a class for which Dantzig was late, professor Jerzy Neyman wrote two examples of famously unsolved statistics problems on the blackboard. When Dantzig arrived, he assumed that the two problems were a homework assignment and wrote them down. According to Dantzig, the problems \"seemed to be a little harder than usual\", but a few days later he handed in completed solutions for the two problems, still believing that they were an assignment that was overdue.\n\nSix weeks later, Dantzig received a visit from an excited professor Neyman, who was eager to tell him that the homework problems he had solved were two of the most famous unsolved problems in statistics. He had prepared one of Dantzig's solutions for publication in a mathematical journal. As Dantzig told it in a 1986 interview in the \"College Mathematics Journal\":\nA year later, when I began to worry about a thesis topic, Neyman just shrugged and told me to wrap the two\nproblems in a binder and he would accept them as my thesis.\n\nYears later another researcher, Abraham Wald, was preparing to publish a paper which arrived at a conclusion for the second problem, and included Dantzig as its co-author when he learned of the earlier solution.\n\nThis story began to spread, and was used as a motivational lesson demonstrating the power of positive thinking. Over time Dantzig's name was removed and facts were altered, but the basic story persisted in the form of an urban legend, and as an introductory scene in the movie \"Good Will Hunting\".\n\nLinear programming is a mathematical method for determining a way to achieve the best outcome (such as maximum profit or lowest cost) in a given mathematical model for some list of requirements represented as linear relationships. Linear programming arose as a mathematical model developed during World War II to plan expenditures and returns in order to reduce costs to the army and increase losses to the enemy. It was kept secret until 1947. Postwar, many industries found its use in their daily planning.\n\nThe founders of this subject are Leonid Kantorovich, a Russian mathematician who developed linear programming problems in 1939, Dantzig, who published the simplex method in 1947, and John von Neumann, who developed the theory of the duality in the same year.\n\nDantzig's original example of finding the best assignment of 70 people to 70 jobs exemplifies the usefulness of linear programming. The computing power required to test all the permutations to select the best assignment is vast; the number of possible configurations exceeds the number of particles in the universe. However, it takes only a moment to find the optimum solution by posing the problem as a linear program and applying the Simplex algorithm. The theory behind linear programming drastically reduces the number of possible optimal solutions that must be checked.\n\nIn 1963, Dantzig’s \"Linear Programming and Extensions\" was published by Princeton University Press. Rich in insight and coverage of significant topics, the book quickly became “the bible” of linear programming.\n\nBooks by George Dantzig:\n\nBook chapters:\n\nArticles, a selection:\n\n\n\n", "id": "13111", "title": "George Dantzig"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13114", "text": "Geoff Ryman\n\nGeoffrey Charles Ryman (born 1951) is a writer of science fiction, fantasy and surrealistic or \"slipstream\" fiction.\n\nRyman currently lectures in Creative Writing for University of Manchester's English Department. His most recent full-length novel, \"The King's Last Song\", is set in Cambodia, both at the time of Angkorean emperor Jayavarman VII, and in the present period. He is currently at work on a new historical novel set in the United States before the Civil War.\n\nRyman was born in Canada and moved to the United States at age 11. He earned degrees in History and English at UCLA, then moved to England in 1973, where he has lived most of his life. He is gay.\n\nIn addition to being an author, Ryman started a web design team for the UK government at the Central Office of Information in 1994. He also led the teams that designed the first official British Monarchy and 10 Downing Street websites, and worked on the UK government's flagship website www.direct.gov.uk.\n\nRyman says he knew he was a writer \"before [he] could talk\", with his first work published in his mother's newspaper column at six years of age.\nHe is best known for his science fiction; however, his first novel was the fantasy \"The Warrior Who Carried Life\", and his revisionist fantasy of the \"Wizard of Oz\" \"Was\" has been called \"his most accomplished work\".\n\nMuch of Ryman's work is based on travels to Cambodia. The first of these \"The Unconquered Country\" (1986) was winner of the World Fantasy Award and British Science Fiction Association Award. His novel \"The King's Last Song\" (2006) was set both in the Angkor Wat era and the time after Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge.\n\nRyman has written, directed and performed in several plays based on works of other writers.\n\nHe was guest of honour at Novacon in 1989 and has twice been a guest speaker at Microcon, in 1994 and in 2004. He was also the guest of honour at the national Swedish sf convention Swecon in 2006, at Gaylaxicon 2008, at Wiscon 2009, and at Åcon 2010.\n\nMundane science fiction is a subgenre of science fiction focusing on stories set on or near the Earth, with a believable use of technology and science as it exists at the time the story is written, the Mundane SF movement was founded in 2004 during the Clarion workshop by Ryman amongst others. In 2008 a Mundane SF issue of \"Interzone\" magazine was published, guest-edited by Ryman, Julian Todd and Trent Walters.\n\nHe is currently at work on a new historical novel set in the United States before their Civil War.\n\n\n\n\n\n| valign=top |\n\n\n\n", "id": "13114", "title": "Geoff Ryman"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13115", "text": "Gametophyte\n\nA gametophyte is a stage in the life cycle of plants and algae that undergo alternation of generations. It is a haploid multicellular organism that develops from a haploid spore that has one set of chromosomes. The gametophyte is the sexual phase in the life cycle of plants and algae. It develops sex organs that produce gametes, haploid sex cells that participate in fertilization to form a diploid zygote in which each cell has two sets of chromosomes. Cell division of the zygote results in a new diploid multicellular organism, the second stage in the life cycle known as the sporophyte, the function of which is to produce haploid spores by meiosis.\n\nIn some multicellular green algae (\"Ulva lactuca\" is one example), red algae and brown algae sporophytes and gametophytes may be externally indistinguishable (isomorphic). In \"Ulva\" the gametes are isogamous, all of one size, shape and general morphology.\n\nIn land plants, anisogamy is universal. As in animals, female and male gametes are called, respectively, \"eggs\" and \"sperm.\" Either the sporophyte or the gametophyte may be reduced (heteromorphic).\n\nIn bryophytes (mosses, liverworts, and hornworts), the gametophyte is the most visible stage of the life cycle. The bryophyte gametophyte is longer lived, nutritionally independent, and the sporophytes are typically attached to the gametophytes and dependent on them. When a moss spore germinates it grows to produce a filament of cells (called the protonema). The mature gametophyte of mosses develops into leafy shoots that produce sex organs (gametangia) that produce gametes. Eggs develop in archegonia and sperm in antheridia.\n\nIn some bryophyte groups such as many liverworts of the order Marchantiales, the gametes are produced on specialized structures called gametophores (or gametangiophores).\n\nIn most ferns, gametophyte is a photosynthetic free living organism called a prothallus. For example, in the leptosporangiate fern \"Dryopteris\", the gametophyte is a free-living, autotrophic prothallus that produces gametes and maintains the sporophyte during its early multicellular development. However in some groups, notably the clade that includes Ophioglossaceae and \"Psilotaceae\", the gametophytes are subterranean and subsist by forming mycotrophic relationships with fungi.\n\nExtant lycophytes produce several different types of gametophytes. In the families Lycopodiaceae and Huperziaceae, gametophytes are subterranean and mycotrophic, deriving nutrients from symbiosis with fungi. \"Isoetes\" and \"Selaginella\", which are heterosporous, megagametophytes develop inside the megaspores, which crack open at the trilete suture to allow the male gametes to access the egg cells in the archegonia inside. The gametophytes of \"Isoetes\" appear to be similar in this respect to those of the extinct Carboniferous giant arborescent clubmosses, \"Lepidodendron\" and \"Lepidostrobus\".\n\nBy contrast, in seed plants (gymnosperms and angiosperms), gametophytes develop into multicellular organisms while still enclosed within the sporangium.\n\nVascular plants that produce only one type of spore are said to be homosporous. They have exosporic gametophytes—that is, the gametophyte is free-living and develops outside of the spore wall. Exosporic gametophytes are normally bisexual, capable of producing both sperm and eggs. In heterosporous vascular plants (plants that produce both microspores and megaspores), the gametophyte develops endosporically, within the spore wall. These gametophytes are unisexual, producing either sperm or eggs but not both.\n\nAll vascular plants are sporophyte dominant, and a trend toward smaller and more sporophyte-dependent female gametophytes is evident as land plants evolved towards reproduction by seeds.\n\nIn plants with heteromorphic gametophytes, there are two distinct kinds of gametophytes. Because the two gametophytes differ in form and function, they are termed \"heteromorphic\", from \"hetero\"- \"different\" and \"morph\" \"form\". The egg producing gametophyte is known as a megagametophyte, because it is typically larger, and the sperm producing gametophyte is known as a microgametophyte. Gametophytes which produce egg and sperm on separate plants are termed Dioicous.\n\nIn heterosporous plants (water ferns, some lycophytes, as well as all gymnosperms and angiosperms), there are two distinct sporangia, each of which produces a single kind of spore and single kind of gametophyte. However, not all heteromorphic gametophytes come from heterosporous plants. That is, some plants have distinct egg-producing and sperm-producing gametophytes, but these gametophytes develop from the same kind of spore inside the same sporangium; \"Sphaerocarpos\" is an example of such a plant.\n\nIn the seed plants, the microgametophyte is called pollen. Seed plant microgametophytes consists of two or three cells when the pollen grains exit the sporangium. The megagametophyte develops within the megaspore of extant seedless vascular plants and within the megasporangium in a cone or flower in seed plants. In seed plants, the microgametophyte (pollen grain) travels to the vicinity of the egg cell (carried by a physical or animal vector), and produces two sperm by mitosis.\n\nIn gymnosperms the megagametophyte consists of several thousand cells and produces one to several archegonia, each with a single egg cell. The gametophyte becomes a food storage tissue in the seed.\n\nIn angiosperms, the megagametophyte is reduced to only a few nuclei and cells, and is sometimes called the embryo sac. A typical embryo sac contains seven cells and eight nuclei, one of which is the egg cell. Two nuclei fuse with a sperm nucleus to form endosperm, which becomes the food storage tissue in the seed.\n\n", "id": "13115", "title": "Gametophyte"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13116", "text": "Gavoi\n\nGavoi is a \"comune\" in central Sardinia (Italy), part of the province of Nuoro, in the natural region of Barbagia. It overlooks the Lake of Gusana.\n\nThe territory of Gavoi is inhabitated since the prenuragic period. During the middleage is cited various times in the list of villages and towns that paid the taxes to the roman curia.\n\nGavoi was hit by the plague in the 18th century.\n\nThe Roman church of San Gavino is Gavoi's foremost sacred spot, through there are eight other ancient churches in the village. The village's center contains rock houses with balconies, and a village fountain is known as \"Antana 'e Cartzonna\".\n\nNear the lake are the archaeological areas of Orrui and San Michele di Fonni. A Roman bridge is submerged beneath the lake.\n\nMountain tourism. Agriculture production include potatoes and cheese (the town is famous for its pecorino).\n\nThe \"tumbarinu\" is a traditional drum made of lamb skin, and more rarely, dog or donkey skin. The tumbarinu is often accompanied with the pipiolu, the traditional sheppard's fife. The \"ballu tundu\", is a traditional dance in the round, as in the Balkan area. Poetry is esteemed, including extemporaneous rhyme competitions on given topics.\n\nThe nearby Sanctuary of Madonna d'Itria hosts a palio, in this case a peculiar horse competition very similar to that of Siena. \n<BR>\n", "id": "13116", "title": "Gavoi"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13117", "text": "Gusana\n\nGusana is the name of an artificial lake and of the surrounding area, in the territory of Gavoi, Sardinia, Italy.\n\nThe lake was built in the 1930s to store water for an electricity generator (central of Coghinadordza), and it covered an ancient Roman bridge as well as an ancient archaeological site of the Nuragici people.\n\nIt is now a tourist destination.\n", "id": "13117", "title": "Gusana"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13118", "text": "Grazia Deledda\n\nGrazia Maria Cosima Damiana Deledda (; 28 September 1871 – 15 August 1936) was an Italian writer who received the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1926 \"for her idealistically inspired writings which with plastic clarity picture the life on her native island [i.e. Sardinia] and with depth and sympathy deal with human problems in general\". She was the first Italian woman to receive this honor.\n\nBorn in Nuoro, Sardinia, into a middle-class family, she attended elementary school and then was educated by a private tutor (a guest of one of her relatives) and moved on to study literature on her own. She started writing at a very young age, inspired by the Sardinian peasants and their struggles.\n\nThe first novel she wrote and published was \"Fiori di Sardegna\" (Flowers of Sardinia). This novel was published in 1892. She first published some pieces in the fashion magazine \"L'ultima moda\" when it still published works in prose and poetry. \"Nell'azzurro\", published by Trevisani in 1890, might be considered her first work. Her family was not supportive of her desire to write. Her works seemed to focus on portraying harsh realities and difficult lifestyles, combining imaginary and autobiographical elements. Her novels tend to criticize social values and moral norms rather than the people who are victims of such circumstances.\n\nStill between prose and poetry are, among the first works, \"Paesaggi sardi\", published by Speirani in 1896. In 1900, after having married Palmiro Madesani, a functionary of the Ministry of War whom she met in Cagliari in October 1899, the writer moved to Rome and after the publication of \"Anime oneste\" in 1895 and of \"Il vecchio della montagna\" in 1900, plus the collaboration with magazines \"La Sardegna\", \"Piccola rivista\" and \"Nuova Antologia\", her work began to gain critical interest. She had two sons and lived a quiet life occupied by her writing. She was a very prolific writer publishing, on average, a novel a year.\n\nIn 1903 she published her first real success, \"Elias Portolu\" that confirmed her as a writer and started her work as a successful writer of novels and theatrical works:\" Cenere\" (1904), \"L'edera\" (1908), \"Sino al confine\" (1911), \"Colombi e sparvieri\" (1912), \"Canne al vento\" (1913) -her most well known book in Italy-, \"L'incendio nell'oliveto\" (1918), \"Il Dio dei venti\" (1922).\n\n\"Cenere\" was the inspiration for a silent movie with the famous Italian actress Eleonora Duse. It was the only time Duse appeared in film.\n\nDeledda received the Nobel Prize in 1926 in Literature after she had been nominated by Henrik Schück, member of the Swedish Academy. Her response in winning the prize was Già! (Look at that!) Deledda was very protective of her daily writing routine. Her schedule was exactly the same seven days a week: a late breakfast, a few hours of reading, lunch followed by a nap and then, clearly, ending the day with a few hours of writing. \nDeledda happened to receive the Nobel Prize almost exactly a year after Benito Mussolini dropped the charade of constitutional rule of the favor of Fascism. Mussolini himself wished to give Grazia a portrait of himself, and he signed it with “profound admiration.”\nWith this string of fame, came a slew of journalists and notable photographers whom she allowed into her home to learn more about her. Her beloved pet crow, Checcha was irritated by all the commotion with people coming in and out. “If Checcha has had enough, so have I,” Deledda was quoted as saying.\n\nDeledda continued to write even as she grew older and weaker. \"La Casa del Poeta\" and \"Sole d'Estate\" are two of the collections of short stories she wrote during this time. She showcased her optimistic view of life even as she suffered from painful illnesses. She believed that life was beautiful and serene, unaltered by personal suffering; man and nature are reconciled in order to overcome physical and spiritual hardships. Her later works show how mankind and faith in God are beautiful things.\n\nShe died in Rome at the age of 64 of breast cancer. \"La chiesa della solitudine\" (1936), Deledda's last novel, is a semi-autobiographical depiction of a young Italian woman coming to terms with her breast cancer. A completed manuscript of the novel \"Cosima\" (1937) was discovered after her death and published posthumously.\n\nHer work has been highly regarded by Luigi Capuana and Giovanni Verga plus some younger writers such as Enrico Thovez, Pietro Pancrazi, Renato Serra, and later until today by Sardinian writers such as Sergio Atzeni, Giulio Angioni, Salvatore Mannuzzu, starters of the so-called Sardinian Literary Spring.\n\nThe life, customs, and traditions of the Sardinian people are prominent in her writing. She relies heavily on geographical description and details and her work is most often concerned with transgressions. Many of her characters are social outcasts that struggle in silence and isolation. Deledda's whole work is based on strong facts of love, pain and death upon which rests the feeling of sin and of an inevitable fatality.\n\nIn her works we can recognize the influence of the verism of Giovanni Verga and, sometimes, also that of the decadentism by Gabriele D'Annunzio.\n\nIn Deledda's novels there is always a strong connection between places and people, feelings and environment. The environment depicted is mostly that one harsh of native Sardinia, but it is not depicted according to regional veristic schemes neither according to the otherworldly vision by D'Annunzio, but relived through the myth.\n\nDeledda has not gained much recognition as a feminist writer potentially due to her themes of women’s pain and suffering as opposed to women’s autonomy.\n\nBelow is a complete list of Deledda's works:\n\nDeledda's birthplace and childhood home in Nuoro has been preserved as a museum in her honor (the Museo Deleddiano). The museum consists of 10 rooms where the stages of the writer's life are reconstructed.\n\n\n\n\nThe voice of Grazia Deledda speaking (in Italian) at the Nobel Prize Ceremony in 1926.\n", "id": "13118", "title": "Grazia Deledda"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13120", "text": "Glenn T. Seaborg\n\nGlenn Theodore Seaborg (; April 19, 1912February 25, 1999) was an American chemist whose involvement in the synthesis, discovery and investigation of ten transuranium elements earned him a share of the 1951 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. His work in this area also led to his development of the actinide concept and the arrangement of the actinide series in the periodic table of the elements.\n\nSeaborg spent most of his career as an educator and research scientist at the University of California, Berkeley, serving as a professor, and, between 1958 and 1961, as the university's second chancellor. He advised ten US Presidentsfrom Harry S. Truman to Bill Clintonon nuclear policy and was Chairman of the United States Atomic Energy Commission from 1961 to 1971, where he pushed for commercial nuclear energy and the peaceful applications of nuclear science. Throughout his career, Seaborg worked for arms control. He was a signatory to the Franck Report and contributed to the Limited Test Ban Treaty, the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. He was a well-known advocate of science education and federal funding for pure research. Toward the end of the Eisenhower administration, he was the principal author of the Seaborg Report on academic science, and, as a member of President Ronald Reagan's National Commission on Excellence in Education, he was a key contributor to its 1983 report \"A Nation at Risk\".\n\nSeaborg was the principal or co-discoverer of ten elements: plutonium, americium, curium, berkelium, californium, einsteinium, fermium, mendelevium, nobelium and element 106, which, while he was still living, was named seaborgium in his honor. He also discovered more than 100 atomic isotopes and is credited with important contributions to the chemistry of plutonium, originally as part of the Manhattan Project where he developed the extraction process used to isolate the plutonium fuel for the second atomic bomb. Early in his career, he was a pioneer in nuclear medicine and discovered isotopes of elements with important applications in the diagnosis and treatment of diseases, most notably iodine-131, which is used in the treatment of thyroid disease. In addition to his theoretical work in the development of the actinide concept, which placed the actinide series beneath the lanthanide series on the periodic table, he postulated the existence of super-heavy elements in the transactinide and superactinide series.\n\nAfter sharing the 1951 Nobel Prize in Chemistry with Edwin McMillan, he received approximately 50 honorary doctorates and numerous other awards and honors. The list of things named after Seaborg ranges from his atomic element to an asteroid. He was a prolific author, penning numerous books and 500 journal articles, often in collaboration with others. He was once listed in the Guinness Book of World Records as the person with the longest entry in \"Who's Who in America\".\n\nGlenn Theodore Seaborg was born in Ishpeming, Michigan, on April 19, 1912, the son of Herman Theodore (Ted) and Selma Olivia Erickson Seaborg. He had one sister, Jeanette, who was two years younger. His family spoke Swedish at home. When Glenn Seaborg was a boy, the family moved to Los Angeles County, California, settling in a subdivision called Home Gardens, later annexed to the City of South Gate, California. About this time he changed the spelling of his first name from <nowiki>'Glen'</nowiki> to \"Glenn\".\n\nSeaborg kept a daily journal from 1927 until he suffered a stroke in 1998. As a youth, Seaborg was both a devoted sports fan and an avid movie buff. His mother encouraged him to become a bookkeeper as she felt his literary interests were impractical. He did not take an interest in science until his junior year when he was inspired by Dwight Logan Reid, a chemistry and physics teacher at David Starr Jordan High School in Watts.\n\nSeaborg graduated from Jordan in 1929 at the top of his class and received a bachelor of arts (AB) degree in chemistry at the University of California, Los Angeles, in 1933. He worked his way through school as a stevedore and a laboratory assistant at Firestone. Seaborg took his PhD in chemistry at the University of California, Berkeley, in 1937 with a doctoral thesis on the \"Interaction of Fast Neutrons with Lead\", in which he coined the term \"nuclear spallation\".\n\nSeaborg was a member of the professional chemistry fraternity Alpha Chi Sigma. As a graduate student in the 1930s Seaborg performed wet chemistry research for his advisor Gilbert Newton Lewis, and published three papers with him on the theory of acids and bases. Seaborg studied the text \"Applied Radiochemistry\" by Otto Hahn, of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry in Berlin, and it had a major impact on his developing interests as a research scientist. For several years, Seaborg conducted important research in artificial radioactivity using the Lawrence cyclotron at UC Berkeley. He was excited to learn from others that nuclear fission was possible—but also chagrined, as his own research might have led him to the same discovery.\n\nSeaborg also became an expert in dealing with noted Berkeley physicist Robert Oppenheimer. Oppenheimer had a daunting reputation, and often answered a junior man's question before it had even been stated. Often the question answered was more profound than the one asked, but of little practical help. Seaborg learned to state his questions to Oppenheimer quickly and succinctly.\n\nSeaborg remained at the University of California, Berkeley, for post-doctoral research. He followed Frederick Soddy's work investigating isotopes and contributed to the discovery of more than 100 isotopes of elements. Using one of Lawrence's advanced cyclotrons, John Livingood, Fred Fairbrother, and Seaborg created a new isotope of iron, iron-59 (Fe-59) in 1937. Iron-59 was useful in the studies of the hemoglobin in human blood. In 1938, Livingood and Seaborg collaborated (as they did for five years) to create an important isotope of iodine, iodine-131 (I-131), which is still used to treat thyroid disease. (Many years later, it was credited with prolonging the life of Seaborg's mother.) As a result of these and other contributions, Seaborg is regarded as a pioneer in nuclear medicine and is one of its most prolific discoverers of isotopes.\n\nIn 1939 he became an instructor in chemistry at Berkeley, was promoted to assistant professor in 1941 and professor in 1945. University of California, Berkeley, physicist Edwin McMillan led a team that discovered element 93, which he named neptunium in 1940. In November, he was persuaded to leave Berkeley temporarily to assist with urgent research in radar technology. Since Seaborg and his colleagues had perfected McMillan's oxidation-reduction technique for isolating neptunium, he asked McMillan for permission to continue the research and search for element 94. McMillan agreed to the collaboration. Seaborg first reported alpha decay proportionate to only a fraction of the element 93 under observation. The first hypothesis for this alpha particle accumulation was contamination by uranium, which produces alpha-decay particles; analysis of alpha-decay particles ruled this out. Seaborg then postulated that a distinct alpha-producing element was being formed from element 93.\n\nIn February 1941, Seaborg and his collaborators produced plutonium-239 through the bombardment of uranium. In their experiments bombarding uranium with deuterons, they observed the creation of neptunium, element 93. But it then underwent beta-decay, forming a new element, plutonium, with 94 protons. Plutonium is fairly stable, but undergoes alpha-decay, which explained the presence of alpha particles coming from neptunium. Thus, on March 28, 1941, Seaborg, physicist Emilio Segrè and Berkeley chemist Joseph W. Kennedy were able to show that plutonium (then known only as element 94) was fissile, an important distinction that was crucial to the decisions made in directing Manhattan Project research. In 1966, Room 307 of Gilman Hall on the campus at the Berkeley, where Seaborg did his work, was declared a U.S. National Historic Landmark.\n\nIn addition to plutonium, he is credited as a lead discoverer of americium, curium, and berkelium, and as a co-discoverer of californium, einsteinium, fermium, mendelevium, nobelium and seaborgium. He shared the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1951 with Edwin McMillan for \"their discoveries in the chemistry of the first transuranium elements.\"\n\nOn April 19, 1942, Seaborg reached Chicago and joined the chemistry group at the Metallurgical Laboratory of the Manhattan Project at the University of Chicago, where Enrico Fermi and his group would later convert uranium-238 to plutonium-239 in a controlled nuclear chain reaction. Seaborg's role was to figure out how to extract the tiny bit of plutonium from the mass of uranium. Plutonium-239 was isolated in visible amounts using a transmutation reaction on August 20, 1942, and weighed on September 10, 1942, in Seaborg's Chicago laboratory. He was responsible for the multi-stage chemical process that separated, concentrated and isolated plutonium. This process was further developed at the Clinton Engineering Works in Oak Ridge, Tennessee, and then entered full-scale production at the Hanford Engineer Works, in Richland, Washington.\n\nSeaborg's theoretical development of the actinide concept resulted in a redrawing of the Periodic Table of the Elements into its current configuration with the actinide series appearing below the lanthanide series. Seaborg developed the chemical elements americium and curium while in Chicago. He managed to secure patents for both elements. His patent on curium never proved commercially viable because of the element's short half-life, but americium is commonly used in household smoke detectors and thus provided a good source of royalty income to Seaborg in later years. Prior to the test of the first nuclear weapon, Seaborg joined with several other leading scientists in a written statement known as the Franck Report (secret at the time but since published) unsuccessfully calling on President Truman to conduct a public demonstration of the atomic bomb witnessed by the Japanese.\n\nAfter the conclusion of World War II and the Manhattan Project, Seaborg was eager to return to academic life and university research free from the restrictions of wartime secrecy. In 1946, he added to his responsibilities as a professor by heading the nuclear chemistry research at the Lawrence Radiation Laboratory operated by the University of California on behalf of the United States Atomic Energy Commission. Seaborg was named one of the \"Ten Outstanding Young Men in America\" by the U.S. Junior Chamber of Commerce in 1947 (along with Richard Nixon and others). Seaborg was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in 1948. From 1954 to 1961 he served as associate director of the radiation laboratory. He was appointed by President Truman to serve as a member of the General Advisory Committee of the Atomic Energy Commission, an assignment he retained until 1960.\n\nSeaborg served as chancellor at the University of California, Berkeley, from 1958 to 1961. His term coincided with a relaxation of McCarthy-era restrictions on students' freedom of expression that had begun under his predecessor, Clark Kerr. In October 1958, Seaborg announced that the University had relaxed its prior prohibitions on political activity on a trial basis, and the ban on communists speaking on campus was lifted. This paved the way for the Free Speech Movement of 1964-65.\n\nSeaborg was an enthusiastic supporter of Cal's sports teams. San Francisco columnist Herb Caen was fond of pointing out that Seaborg's surname is an anagram of \"Go Bears\", a popular cheer at UC Berkeley. Seaborg was proud of the fact that the Cal Bears won their first and only National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) basketball championship in 1959, while he was chancellor. The football team also won the conference title and played in the Rose Bowl that year. He served on the Faculty Athletic Committee for several years and was the co-author of a book, \"Roses from the Ashes: Breakup and Rebirth in Pacific Coast Intercollegiate Athletics\" (2000), concerning the Pacific Coast Conference recruiting scandal, and the founding of what is now the Pac-12, in which he played a role in restoring confidence in the integrity of collegiate sports.\n\nSeaborg served on the President's Science Advisory Committee (PSAC) during the Eisenhower administration. PSAC produced a report on \"Scientific Progress, the Universities, and the Federal Government\", also known as the \"Seaborg Report\", in November 1960, that urged greater federal funding of science. In 1959, he helped found the Berkeley Space Sciences Laboratory with Clark Kerr.\n\nAfter appointment by President John F. Kennedy and confirmation by the United States Senate, Seaborg was chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) from 1961 to 1971. His pending appointment by President-elect Kennedy was nearly derailed in late 1960 when members of the Kennedy transition team learned that Seaborg had been listed in a \"U.S. News & World Report\" article as a member of \"Nixon's Idea Men\". Seaborg said that as a lifetime Democrat he was baffled when the article appeared associating him with outgoing Vice President Richard Nixon, a Republican whom Seaborg considered a casual acquaintance.\nWhile chairman of the AEC, Seaborg participated on the negotiating team for the Limited Test Ban Treaty (LTBT), in which the US, UK, and USSR agreed to ban all above-ground test detonations of nuclear weapons. Seaborg considered his contributions to the achievement of the LTBT as one of his greatest accomplishments. Despite strict rules from the Soviets about photography at the signing ceremony, Seaborg snuck a tiny camera past the Soviet guards to take a close-up photograph of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev as he signed the treaty.\nSeaborg enjoyed a close relationship with President Lyndon Johnson and influenced the administration to pursue the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. Seaborg was called to the White House in the first week of the Nixon Administration in January 1969 to advise President Richard Nixon on his first diplomatic crisis involving the Soviets and nuclear testing. He clashed with Nixon presidential adviser John Ehrlichman over the treatment of a Jewish scientist, Zalman Shapiro, whom the Nixon administration suspected of leaking nuclear secrets to Israel.\n\nSeaborg published several books and journal articles during his tenure at the Atomic Energy Commission. He predicted the existence of elements beyond those on the periodic table, the transactinide series and the superactinide series of undiscovered synthetic elements. While most of these theoretical future elements have extremely short half-lives and thus no expected practical applications, he also hypothesized the existence of stable super-heavy isotopes of certain elements in an island of stability. Seaborg served as chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission until 1971.\n\nFollowing his service as Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission, Seaborg returned to UC Berkeley where he was awarded the position of University Professor. At the time, there had been fewer University Professors at UC Berkeley than Nobel Prize winners. He also served as Chairman of the Lawrence Hall of Science where he became the principal investigator for Great Explorations in Math and Science (GEMS) working with director Jacqueline Barber. Seaborg served as at the University of California, Berkeley, from 1958 to 1961, and served as President of the American Association for the Advancement of Science in 1972 and as President of the American Chemical Society in 1976.\n\nIn 1980, he transmuted several thousand atoms of bismuth into gold at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory. His experimental technique, using nuclear physics, was able to remove protons and neutrons from the bismuth atoms. Seaborg's technique would have been far too expensive to enable routine manufacturing of gold, but his work was close to the mythical Philosopher's Stone.\n\nIn 1981, Seaborg became a founding member of the World Cultural Council.\n\nIn 1983, President Ronald Reagan appointed Seaborg to serve on the National Commission on Excellence in Education. The commission produced a report \"A Nation at Risk: The Imperative for Educational Reform\", which focused national attention on education as a national issue germane to the federal government. In 2008, Margaret Spellings wrote that \nSeaborg lived most of his later life in Lafayette, California, where he devoted himself to editing and publishing the journals that documented both his early life and later career. He rallied a group of scientists who criticized the science curriculum in the state of California, which he viewed as far too socially oriented and not nearly focused enough on hard science. California Governor Pete Wilson appointed Seaborg to head a committee that proposed changes to California's science curriculum despite outcries from labor organizations and others.\n\nIn 1942, Seaborg married Helen Griggs, the secretary of physicist Ernest Lawrence. Under wartime pressure, Seaborg had moved to Chicago while engaged to Griggs. When Seaborg returned to accompany Griggs for the journey back to Chicago, friends expected them to marry in Chicago. But, eager to be married, Seaborg and Griggs impulsively got off the train in the town of Caliente, Nevada, for what they thought would be a quick wedding. When they asked for City Hall, they found Caliente had none—they would have to travel north to Pioche, the county seat. With no car, this was no easy feat, but one of Caliente's newest deputy sheriffs turned out to be a recent graduate of the Cal Berkeley chemistry department and was more than happy to do a favor for Seaborg. The deputy sheriff arranged for the wedding couple to ride up and back to Pioche in a mail truck. The witnesses at the Seaborg wedding were a clerk and a janitor. Glenn Seaborg and Helen Griggs Seaborg had seven children, of whom the first, Peter Glenn Seaborg, died in 1997 (his twin Paulette having died in infancy). The others were Lynne Seaborg Cobb, David Seaborg, Steve Seaborg, Eric Seaborg, and Dianne Seaborg.\n\nSeaborg was an avid hiker. Upon becoming Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission in 1961, he commenced taking daily hikes through a trail that he blazed at the headquarters site in Germantown, Maryland. He frequently invited colleagues and visitors to accompany him, and the trail became known as the \"Glenn Seaborg Trail.\" He and his wife Helen are credited with blazing a trail in the East Bay area near their home in Lafayette, California. This trail has since become a part of the American Hiking Association's cross-country network of trails. Seaborg and his wife walked the trail network from Contra Costa County all the way to the California–Nevada border.\nSeaborg was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in 1972 and a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) of London in 1985. He was honored as Swedish-American of the Year in 1962 by the Vasa Order of America. In 1991, the organization named \"Local Lodge Glenn T. Seaborg No. 719\" in his honor during the Seaborg Honors ceremony at which he appeared. This lodge maintains a scholarship fund in his name, as does the unrelated Swedish-American Club of Los Angeles.\n\nSeaborg kept a close bond to his Swedish origin. He visited Sweden every so often, and his family were members of the Swedish \"Pemer Genealogical Society\", a family association open for every descendant of the Pemer family, a Swedish family with German origin, from which Seaborg was descended on his mother's side.\n\nOn August 24, 1998, while in Boston to attend a meeting by the American Chemical Society, Seaborg suffered a stroke, which led to his death six months later on February 25, 1999, at his home in Lafayette.\n\nDuring his lifetime, Seaborg is said to have been the author or co-author of numerous books and 500 scientific journal articles, many of them brief reports on fast-breaking discoveries in nuclear science while other subjects, most notably the actinide concept, represented major theoretical contributions in the history of science. He held more than 40 patents – among them the only patents ever issued for chemical elements, americium and curium, and received more than 50 doctorates and honorary degrees in his lifetime. At one time, he was listed in the Guinness Book of World Records as having the longest entry in Marquis \"Who's Who in America\". In February 2005, he was posthumously inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame. His papers are in the Library of Congress.\n\nThe American Chemical Society-Chicago Section honored him with the Willard Gibbs Award in 1966.\nThe element seaborgium was named after Seaborg by Albert Ghiorso, E. Kenneth Hulet, and others, who also credited Seaborg as a co-discoverer. It was named while Seaborg was still alive, which proved controversial. He influenced the naming of so many elements that with the announcement of seaborgium, it was noted in \"Discover\" magazine's review of the year in science that he could receive a letter addressed in chemical elements: seaborgium, lawrencium (for the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory where he worked), berkelium, californium, americium. Seaborgium is the first element ever to have been officially named after a living person. The second element to be named so is oganesson, in 2016 chosen for element 118, after Yuri Oganessian.\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "13120", "title": "Glenn T. Seaborg"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13122", "text": "Province of Grosseto\n\nThe Province of Grosseto () is a province in the Tuscany region of Italy. Its capital is the city of Grosseto. As of 2013 the province had a total population of 225,098 people. The CIMA Festival is a prestigious gathering of classical music lovers in Monte Argentario.\n\nThe Province of Grosseto completely occupies the southern end of Tuscany, and with a territorial area of , it is the most extensive in the region and one of the least dense in population in Italy. The province is bordered to the northwest by the Province of Livorno, to the north by the Province of Pisa, to the northeast by the Province of Siena, and to the southeast by the Province of Viterbo in Lazio. To the south is the Tyrrhenian Sea, which includes the southern islands of the Tuscan archipelago, including Isola del Giglio and the smaller Giannutri islands and Formiche di Grosseto and Formica di Burano. The Arcipelago Toscano National Park spans both the provinces of Grosseto and Livorno, and includes the seven main islands of the Tuscan Archipelago: Elba, Isola del Giglio, Capraia, Montecristo, Pianosa, Giannutri, Gorgona, and some of the minor islands and rock outcrops. The highest point in the park is Mount Capanne, at in elevation, on the island of Elba. \n\nThe Colline Metallifere (Metalliferous Hills) line the border in the south with Lazio, and contain the Natural Park of Maremma. The principal rivers are the Ombrone, Fiora, Albegna, Pecora, Bruna, Merse, Lente, Farma and Chiarone. The coastline between the Gulf of Follonica and the mouth of the Chiarone is dominated by blue waters and pine forests, and is home to resorts such as Marina di Grosseto, Principina a Mare, Castiglione della Pescaia, Punta Ala, Puntone di Scarlino and Talamone. Lakes include Lago dell'Accesa, Lago di Burano, Lago di San Floriano and Lago Acquato. Also of note is the volcanic cone of Mount Amiata, Bandite di Scarlino (213 m), Promontorio di Punta Ala e delle Rocchette (350 m), Monti dell'Uccellina (417 m), Monte Argentario (635 m), and Promontorio di Ansedonia (113 m).\n\nThere are 28 (singular: ) in the province.\nAs of June 2014, the main by population are:\n\nThis is the complete list of \"comuni\" in the province of Grosseto:\nThis is the complete list of the (singular: ) – towns and villages – in the province of Grosseto:\n", "id": "13122", "title": "Province of Grosseto"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13126", "text": "Gaspard-Gustave de Coriolis\n\n(Gaspard-)Gustave de Coriolis (; 21 May 1792 – 19 September 1843) was a French mathematician, mechanical engineer and scientist. He is best known for his work on the supplementary forces that are detected in a rotating frame of reference, leading to the Coriolis effect. He was the first to coin the term \"work\" for the transfer of energy by a force acting through a distance.\n\nCoriolis was born in Paris in 1792. In 1808 he sat the entrance exam and was placed second of all the students entering that year, and in 1816, he became a tutor at the École Polytechnique, where he did experiments on friction and hydraulics.\n\nIn 1829, Coriolis published a textbook, \"Calcul de l'Effet des Machines\" (\"Calculation of the Effect of Machines\"), which presented mechanics in a way that could readily be applied by industry. In this period, the correct expression for kinetic energy, \"½mv\", and its relation to mechanical work, became established.\n\nDuring the following years, Coriolis worked to extend the notions of kinetic energy and work to rotating systems. The first of his papers, \"Sur le principe des forces vives dans les mouvements relatifs des machines\" (On the principle of kinetic energy in the relative motion in machines), was read to the Académie des Sciences (Coriolis 1832). Three years later came the paper that would make his name famous, \"Sur les équations du mouvement relatif des systèmes de corps\" (On the equations of relative motion of a system of bodies). Coriolis's papers do not deal with the atmosphere or even the rotation of the Earth, but with the transfer of energy in rotating systems like waterwheels. Coriolis discussed the supplementary forces that are detected in a rotating frame of reference and he divided these forces into two categories. The second category contained the force that would eventually bear his name. A detailed discussion may be found in Dugas.\n\nIn 1835, he published a mathematical work on collisions of spheres: \"Théorie Mathématique des Effets du Jeu de Billard\", considered a classic on the subject.\n\nCoriolis's name began to appear in the meteorological literature at the end of the 19th century, although the term \"Coriolis force\" was not used until the beginning of the 20th century. Today, the name Coriolis has become strongly associated with meteorology, but all major discoveries about the general circulation and the relation between the pressure and wind fields were made without knowledge about Gaspard Gustave Coriolis.\n\nCoriolis became professor of mechanics at the École Centrale des Arts et Manufactures in 1829. Upon the death of Claude-Louis Navier in 1836, Coriolis succeeded him in the chair of applied mechanics at the École Nationale des Ponts et Chaussées and to Navier's place in the Académie des Sciences. In 1838, he succeeded Dulong as \"Directeur des études\" (director of studies) in the École Polytechnique.\n\nHe died in 1843 at the age of 51 in Paris. His name is one of the 72 names inscribed on the Eiffel Tower.\n\n\n", "id": "13126", "title": "Gaspard-Gustave de Coriolis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13131", "text": "Géza, Grand Prince of the Hungarians\n\nGéza ( 940 – 997), also Gejza, was Grand Prince of the Hungarians from the early 970s. He was the son of Grand Prince Taksony and his OrientalKhazar, Pecheneg or Volga Bulgarianwife. He married Sarolt, a daughter of an Orthodox Hungarian chieftain. After ascending the throne, Géza made peace with the Holy Roman Empire. Within Hungary, he consolidated his authority with extreme cruelty, according to the unanimous narration of nearly contemporaneous sources. He was the first Hungarian monarch to support Christian missionaries from Western Europe. Although he was baptised (his baptismal name was Stephen), his Christian faith remained shallow and he continued to perform acts of pagan worship. He was succeeded by his son, Stephen who was crowned the first King of Hungary in 1000 or 1001.\n\nGéza was the elder son of Taksony, Grand Prince of the Hungarians. His mother was his father's wife \"from the land of the Cumans\", according to the anonymous author of the \"Gesta Hungarorum\". This anachronistic reference to the Cumans suggests that she was of Khazar, Pecheneg or Volga Bulgarian origin. The Byzantine Emperor Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus, who listed the descendants of Grand Prince Árpád around 950, did not mention Géza. Even so, Gyula Kristó wrote that Géza was born around 940 and the emperor ignored him because of his youth. The genuine form of his name was either \"Gyeücsa\" or \"Gyeusa\", which is possibly a diminutive form of the Turkic title \"yabgu\". Géza's father arranged his marriage with Sarolta daughter of a Hungarian chieftain called Gyula, who ruled Transylvania independently of the grand prince and had converted to Christianity in Constantinople. Sarolt seems to have also adhered to Orthodox Christianity, according to Bruno of Querfurt's remark on her \"languid and muddled Christianity\".\n\nGéza succeeded his father around 972. He adopted a centralizing policy, which gave rise to his fame as a merciless ruler. The longer version of his son's \"Life\" even states that Géza's hands were \"defiled with blood\". Pál Engel wrote that Géza carried out a \"large-scale purge\" against his relatives, which explains the lack of references to other members of the Árpád dynasty from around 972. Koppány, who continued to rule the southern parts of Transdanubia, is the only exception to this dearth of references. A marriage alliance between the German and Byzantine dynasties brought about a rapproachement between the two powers neighboring Hungary in 972. Géza decided to make peace with the Holy Roman Empire. First, a monk named Bruno sent by Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor arrived in Hungary around 972. Hungarian \"legates\" were present at a conference held by the emperor in Quedlinburg in 973.\n\nA record on one Bishop Prunwart in the Abbey of Saint Gall mentions his success in baptising many Hungarians, including their \"king\". The nearly contemporaneous Thietmar of Merseburg confirms that the conversion to Christianity of the pagan Hungarians started under Géza, who became the first Christian ruler of Hungary. His baptismal name was Stephen. However, Géza continued to observe pagan cults, which proves that his conversion to Christianity was never complete. Kristó and other historians have said that the first Roman Catholic diocese in Hungary, with its seat in Veszprém, was set up in Géza's reign, but their view has not been unanimously accepted. A charter issued during his son's reign states that Géza was the founder of the Benedictine Pannonhalma Archabbey.\n\nTaking advantage of internal conflicts which emerged in the Holy Roman Empire after Emperor Otto I's death, Géza invaded Bavaria and took the fortress of Melk in 983. In 991, the Bavarians launched a counter-attack which forced Géza to withdraw Hungarian forces from the territories east of the Vienna Woods. Furthermore, he renounced the lands east of the river Leitha in his peace treaty of 996 with Henry IV of Bavaria. Géza also arranged the marriage of his son and heir Stephen to Henry IV's sister Giselle. Even before this marriage alliance, Géza convoked the Hungarian leaders to an assembly and forced them to take an oath confirming his son's right to succeed him.\n\nSarolt gave birth to at least three of Géza's children; Stephen, who succeeded his father on the throne, and two unnamed daughters. Sarolt survived Géza, which suggests that she was also the mother of Géza's daughters. Based on the \"Polish-Hungarian Chronicle\", Szabolcs de Vajay wrote that the daughters' mother was Géza's alleged second wife Adelaide (Adleta) of Poland, but this has not been widely accepted. The following family tree presents Géza's ancestry and his offspring.\n\n\"*Whether Menumorut is an actual or an invented person is debated by modern scholars.\"<br>\"**A Khazar, Pecheneg or Volga Bulgarian lady.\"<br>\"***Samuel Aba might have been Géza's grandson instead of his son-in-law.\"<br>\"****The Aba family descending from them still flourished in the 14th century.\"\n\n\n \n", "id": "13131", "title": "Géza, Grand Prince of the Hungarians"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13134", "text": "Gecko\n\nGeckos are lizards belonging to the infraorder Gekkota, found in warm climates throughout the world. They range from 1.6 to 60 cm (0.64 to 24 inches). Most geckos cannot blink, but they often lick their eyes to keep them clean and moist. They have a fixed lens within each iris that enlarges in darkness to let in more light.\n\nGeckos are unique among lizards in their vocalizations. They use chirping sounds in social interactions with other geckos. They are the most species-rich group of lizards, with about 1,500 different species worldwide. The New Latin \"gekko\" and English \"gecko\" stem from the Indonesian-Malay \"gēkoq\", which is imitative of the sound the animals make.\n\nAll geckos, excluding the Eublepharidae family, lack eyelids and instead have a transparent membrane, which they lick to clean. Nocturnal species have an excellent night vision; their color vision is 350 times more sensitive than human color vision. The nocturnal geckos evolved from diurnal species which had lost the eye rods. The gecko eye therefore modified its cones that increased in size into different types both single and double. Three different photopigments have been retained and are sensitive to UV, blue, and green. They also use a multifocal optical system that allows them to generate a sharp image for at least two different depths.\n\nMost gecko species can lose their tails in defense, a process called autotomy. Many species are well known for their specialized toe pads that enable them to climb smooth and vertical surfaces, and even cross indoor ceilings with ease. Geckos are well-known to people who live in warm regions of the world, where several species of geckos make their home inside human habitations. These (for example the house gecko) become part of the indoor menagerie and are often welcomed, as they feed on insects, including moths and mosquitoes. Unlike most lizards, geckos are usually nocturnal.\n\nThe largest species, the kawekaweau, is only known from a single, stuffed specimen found in the basement of a museum in Marseille, France. This gecko was 60 cm (24 in) long and it was likely endemic to New Zealand, where it lived in native forests. It was probably wiped out along with much of the native fauna of these islands in the late 19th century, when new invasive species such as rats and stoats were introduced to the country during European colonization. The smallest gecko, the Jaragua sphaero, is a mere 1.6 cm long and was discovered in 2001 on a small island off the coast of the Dominican Republic.\n\nGeckos are selectively bred. Geckos occur in various patterns and colors, and are among the most colorful lizards in the world. Some species can change colour and may be lighter in colour at night. Some species are parthenogenic, which means the female is capable of reproducing without copulating with a male. This improves the gecko's ability to spread to new islands. However, in a situation where a single female gecko populates an entire island, the island will suffer from a lack of genetic variation within the geckos that inhabit it. The gecko's mating call sounds like a shortened bird chirping which attracts males, when they are nearby. Like other reptiles, geckos are ectothermic, producing very little metabolic heat. Essentially a gecko's body temperature is dependent on its environment. Also, in order to accomplish their main functions—such as locomotion, feeding, reproduction, etc.—geckos must have a relatively elevated temperature.\n\nAll geckos shed their skin at fairly regular intervals, with species differing in timing and method. Leopard geckos will shed at about two- to four-week intervals. The presence of moisture aids in the shedding. When shedding begins, the gecko will speed the process by detaching the loose skin from its body and eating it.\n\nGecko toes have special adaptations that allow them to adhere to most surfaces without the use of liquids or surface tension. About 60% of gecko species have adhesive toe pads; such pads have been gained and lost repeatedly over the course of gecko evolution. Adhesive toepads evolved independently in about 11 different gecko lineages and were lost in at least 9 lineages. The spatula-shaped setae arranged in lamellae on gecko footpads enable attractive van der Waals' forces between the β-keratin lamellae/setae/spatulae structures and the surface. These van der Waals interactions involve no fluids; in theory, a boot made of synthetic setae would adhere as easily to the surface of the International Space Station as it would to a living-room wall, although adhesion varies with humidity. The setae on the feet of geckos are also self-cleaning and will usually remove any clogging dirt within a few steps. Teflon, which has very low surface energy, is more difficult for geckos to adhere to than many other surfaces.\n\nIncreasing humidity typically fortifies gecko adhesion, even on hydrophobic surfaces, yet is reduced if completely immersed in water. The role of water in that system is under discussion, yet recent experiments agree that the presence of molecular water layers (water molecules carry a very large dipole moment) on the setae as well as on the surface increase the surface energy of both, therefore the energy gain in getting these surfaces in contact is enlarged, which results in an increased gecko adhesion force. Moreover, the elastic properties of the b-keratin change with water uptake. Friction experiments with gecko toes—torn parallel to surfaces—have shown to be influenced also by electrostatic forces.\n\nGecko toes seem to be \"double jointed\", but this is a misnomer and is properly called digital hyperextension. Gecko toes can hyperextend in the opposite direction from human fingers and toes. This allows them to overcome the van der Waals force by peeling their toes off surfaces from the tips inward. In essence, by this peeling action, the gecko separates spatula by spatula from the surface, so for each spatula separation, only some nN are necessary. (The process is similar to removing scotch tape from a surface.)\n\nGeckos' toes operate well below their full attractive capabilities most of the time, because the margin for error is great depending upon the surface roughness, and therefore the number of setae in contact with that surface. \nUse of small van der Waals attraction force requires very large surface areas: every square millimeter of a gecko's footpad contains about 14,000 hair-like setae. Each seta has a diameter of 5 μm. Human hair varies from 18 to 180 μm, so a human hair could hold between 12 and 1300 setae. Each seta is in turn tipped with between 100 and 1,000 spatulae. Each spatula is 0.2 μm long (one five-millionth of a meter), or just below the wavelength of visible light.\n\nThe setae of a typical mature gecko would be capable of supporting a weight of : each spatula can exert an adhesive force of 5 to 25 nN. The exact value of the adhesion force of a spatula varies with the surface energy of the substrate to which it adheres. Recent studies have moreover shown that the component of the surface energy derived from long-range forces, such as van der Waals forces, depends on the material's structure below the outermost atomic layers (up to 100 nm beneath the surface); taking that into account, the adhesive strength can be inferred.\n\nRecent studies have also revealed that apart from the setae, phospholipids—fatty substances produced naturally in their bodies—also come into play. These lipids lubricate the setae and allow the gecko to detach its foot before the next step.\n\nThe origin of gecko adhesion likely started as simple modifications to the epidermis on the underside of the toes. This was recently discovered in the genus \"Gonatodes\" from South America. Simple elaborations of the epidermal spinules into setae have enabled \"Gonatodes humeralis\" to climb smooth surfaces and sleep on smooth leaves.\n\nBiomimetic technologies designed to mimic gecko adhesion could produce reusable self-cleaning dry adhesives with many applications. Development effort is being put into these technologies, but manufacturing synthetic setae is not a trivial material design task.\n\nGeckos are polyphyodonts and able to replace each of their 100 teeth every 3 to 4 months. Next to the full grown tooth there is a small replacement tooth developing from the odontogenic stem cell in the dental lamina.\nThe formation of the teeth is pleurodont; they are fused (ankylosed) by their sides to the inner surface of the jaw bones.\nThis formation is common in all species in the order Squamata.\n\nThe infraorder Gekkota is divided into seven families, containing numerous genera of gecko species.\n\n\nMore than 1,650 species of geckos occur worldwide, including these familiar or notable species:\n\n\n", "id": "13134", "title": "Gecko"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13135", "text": "Game show\n\nA game show is a type of radio, television, or internet programming genre in which contestants, television personalities or celebrities, sometimes as part of a team, play a game which involves answering questions or solving puzzles usually for money and/or prizes. Alternatively, a \"gameshow\" can be a demonstrative program about a game (while usually retaining the spirit of an awards ceremony). In the former, contestants may be invited from a pool of public applicants. On some shows, contestants compete against other players or another team, while other shows involve contestants playing alone for a reward or a high score. Game shows often reward players with prizes such as cash, trips and goods and services provided by the show's sponsor prize suppliers, who in turn usually do so for the purposes of product placement. One of the reasons that television broadcasters make game shows is because they are substantially less costly than producing scripted drama shows. Some TV game shows fall under the category of reality television.\n\nTelevision game shows descended from similar programs on radio. The very first television game show, \"Spelling Bee\", was broadcast in 1938. \"Truth or Consequences\" was the first game show to air on commercially licensed television. Its first episode aired in 1941 as an experimental broadcast. Over the course of the 1950s, as television began to pervade the popular culture, game shows quickly became a fixture. Daytime game shows would be played for lower stakes to target stay-at-home housewives. Higher-stakes programs would air in primetime. During the late 1950s, high-stakes games such as \"Twenty One\" and \"The $64,000 Question\" began a rapid rise in popularity. However, the rise of quiz shows proved to be short-lived. In 1959, many of the higher stakes game shows were discovered to be rigged and ratings declines led to most of the primetime games being canceled.\n\nAn early variant of the game show, the panel game, survived the quiz show scandals. On shows like \"What's My Line?\", \"I've Got A Secret\" and \"To Tell The Truth\", panels of celebrities would interview a guest in an effort to determine some fact about them; in others, celebrities would answer questions. Panel games had success in primetime until the late 1960s, when they were collectively dropped from television because of their perceived “low budget” nature. Panel games made a comeback in American daytime television (where the lower budgets were tolerated) in the 1970s through comedy-driven shows such as \"Match Game\" and \"Hollywood Squares\". In the UK, commercial demographic pressures were not as prominent, and restrictions on game shows made in the wake of the scandals limited the style of games that could be played and the amount of money that could be awarded. Panel shows there were kept in primetime and have continued to thrive; they have transformed into showcases for the nation's top stand-up comedians on shows such as \"Have I Got News for You\", \"Would I Lie to You?\", \"Mock the Week\", \"QI\" and \"8 Out of 10 Cats\", all of which put a heavy emphasis on comedy, leaving the points as mere formalities. The focus on quick-witted comedians has resulted in strong ratings, which, combined with low costs of production, have only spurred growth in the UK panel show phenomenon.\n\nGame shows remained a fixture of US daytime television through the 1960s after the quiz show scandals. Lower-stakes games made a slight comeback in daytime in the early 1960s; examples include \"Jeopardy!\" which began in 1964 and the original version of \"The Match Game\" first aired in 1962. \"Let's Make a Deal\" began in 1963 and the 1960s also marked the debut of \"Hollywood Squares\", \"Password\", \"The Dating Game\" and \"The Newlywed Game\".\n\nThough CBS gave up on daytime game shows in 1968, the other networks did not follow suit. Color television was introduced to the game show genre in the late 1960s on all three networks. The 1970s saw a renaissance of the game show as new games and massive upgrades to existing games made debuts on the major networks. \"The New Price Is Right\", an update of the 1950s-era game show \"The Price Is Right\", debuted in 1972 and marked CBS's return to the game show format in its effort to draw wealthier, suburban viewers. \"The Match Game\" became \"Big Money\" \"Match Game 73\", which proved popular enough to prompt a spin-off, \"Family Feud\", on ABC in 1976. \"The $10,000 Pyramid\" and its numerous higher-stakes derivatives also debuted in 1973, while the 1970s also saw the return of formerly disgraced producer and host Jack Barry, who debuted \"The Joker's Wild\" and a clean version of the previously rigged \"Tic-Tac-Dough\" in the 1970s. \"Wheel of Fortune\" debuted on NBC in 1975. The Prime Time Access Rule, which took effect in 1971, barred networks from broadcasting in the 7-8 p.m. time slot immediately preceding prime time, opening up time slots for syndicated programming. Most of the syndicated programs were \"nighttime\" adaptations of network daytime game shows; these game shows originally aired once a week, but by the late 1970s and early 1980s most of the games had transitioned to five days a week.\nGame shows were the lowest priority of television networks, and were rotated out every thirteen weeks if unsuccessful. Most tapes were destroyed until the early 1980s. Over the course of the late 1980s and early 1990s as fewer new hits were produced, game shows lost their permanent place in the daytime lineup. ABC transitioned out of the daytime game show format in the mid-1980s (briefly returning to the format for one season in 1990 with a \"Match Game\" revival). NBC's game block also lasted until 1991, but the network attempted to bring them back in 1993 before cancelling its game show block again in 1994. CBS phased out most of their game shows, except for \"The Price Is Right\", by 1993. To the benefit of the genre, the moves of \"Wheel of Fortune\" and a modernized revival of \"Jeopardy!\" to syndication in 1983 and 1984, respectively, was and remains highly successful; the two are, to this day, fixtures in the prime time \"access period\". \n\nCable television also allowed for the debut of game shows such as \"Supermarket Sweep\" (Lifetime), \"Trivial Pursuit\" and \"Family Challenge\" (Family Channel), and \"Double Dare\" (Nickelodeon). It also opened up a previously underdeveloped market for game show reruns; general interest networks such as CBN Cable Network and USA Network had popular blocks for game show reruns from the mid-1980s to the mid-'90s before that niche was overtaken by Game Show Network in 1994.\n\nAfter the popularity of game shows hit a nadir in the mid-1990s United States (at which point \"The Price Is Right\" was the only game show still on daytime network TV), the British game show \"Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?\" began distribution across the globe. Upon the show's American debut in 1999, it was a hit and became a regular part of ABC's prime time lineup until 2002. Several shorter-lived high-stakes games were attempted around the time of the millennium, both in the United States and the United Kingdom, such as \"Winning Lines\", \"The Chair\", \"Greed\" and \"Shafted\", leading to some dubbing this period as \"The Million-Dollar Game Show Craze\". These higher stakes contests also opened the door to reality television contests such as \"Survivor\" and \"Big Brother\", in which contestants win large sums of money for outlasting their peers in a given environment. Several game shows returned to daytime in syndication during this time as well, such as \"Family Feud\", \"Hollywood Squares\", and \"Millionaire\". \n\nThe popularity of game shows in the United States was closely paralleled around the world. Reg Grundy Organisation, for instance, would buy the international rights for American game shows and reproduce them in other countries, especially in Grundy's native Australia. In the United Kingdom, game shows have had a more steady and permanent place in the television lineup and never lost popularity in the 1990s as they did in the United States, due in part to the fact that game shows were highly regulated by the Independent Broadcasting Authority in the 1980s and those restrictions were lifted in the 1990s, allowing for higher-stakes games to be played. Game shows have had an inconsistent place in Canadian television, with most homegrown game shows there being made for the French-speaking Quebecois market and the majority of English-language game shows in the country being rebroadcast from, or made with the express intent of export to, the United States; there have been exceptions to this (see, for instance, the long-running \"Definition\"). Unlike reality television franchises, international game show franchises generally only see Canadian adaptations in a series of specials, based heavily on the American versions but usually with a Canadian host to allow for Canadian content credits. The smaller markets and lower revenue opportunities for Canadian shows in general also affect game shows there, with Canadian games (especially Quebecois ones) often having very low budgets for prizes, unless the series is made for export. Canadian contestants are generally allowed to participate on American game shows, and there have been at least three Canadian game show hosts; Monty Hall, Jim Perry and Alex Trebek; that have gone on to long careers hosting American series.\nIn the US, CBS is currently the only major network airing daily national game shows. It still airs \"The Price Is Right\" and, as of 2009, is also airing a revival of \"Let's Make a Deal\". \"Deal\" airs on weekdays at a time chosen by each CBS affiliate, while \"Price\" airs weekdays at 10am or 11am in most markets. Although ABC does not air any daily national game shows, they revived four classic game shows for weekly prime time airing during the summer. These shows are \"Celebrity Family Feud\" in 2015 as well as \"To Tell The Truth,\" \"The $100,000 Pyramid\" and \"Match Game\" in 2016. In addition, ABC's syndication wing Disney-ABC Domestic Television distributes \"Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?\", and many of their local affiliates air it in syndication.\nThe oldest, continually aired radio quiz show in the United States was \"Simply Trivia\", which aired on public radio station WYSO in Yellow Springs, Ohio; it ran from 1972 through 2014.\n\nMany of the prizes awarded on game shows are provided through product placement; although in some cases, they are provided by private organizations or purchased at either the full price or at a discount by the show. There is the widespread use of \"promotional consideration\", in which a game show receives a subsidy from an advertiser in return for awarding that manufacturer's product as a prize or consolation prize. Some products supplied by manufacturers may not be intended to be awarded at all, and are instead just used as part of the gameplay (such as the low-priced items used in several Pricing Games of \"The Price Is Right\").\n\nFor high-stakes games, a network may purchase prize indemnity insurance to avoid paying the cost of a rare but expensive prize out of pocket. If said prize is won too often, the insurance company may refuse to insure a show (this was a factor in the discontinuation of \"The Price Is Right $1,000,000 Spectacular\" series of prime-time specials). In 2008, three of the contestants on \"The Price Is Right $1,000,000 Spectacular\" won the top prize in a five-episode span after fifteen episodes without a winner, due in large part to a change in the rules; the insurance companies had made it extremely difficult to get further insurance for the remaining episodes. A network or syndicator may also opt to distribute large cash prizes in the form of an annuity, spreading the cost of the prize out over several years or decades.\n\nFrom about 1960 through the rest of the 20th century, American networks placed restrictions on the amount of money that could be given away on a game show, in an effort to avoid a repeat of the scandals of the 1950s. This usually took the form of an earnings cap that forced a player to retire once they won a certain amount of money or a limit of how many episodes (usually five) a player could appear on a show. The introduction of syndicated games, particularly in the 1980s, eventually allowed for more valuable prizes and extended runs on a particular show. Likewise, British television was under strict regulations, even more strict than those on the American side of the Atlantic Ocean, on prizes until the 1990s; these limits seriously restricted the value of prizes that could be given and did not allow games of chance to have an influence on the outcome of the game (thus the British version of \"The Price Is Right\" at first did not include the American version's \"Showcase Showdown,\" in which contestants spun a large wheel to determine who would advance to the Showcase bonus round). The lifting of these restrictions in the 1990s was a major factor in the explosion of high-stakes game shows in the later part of that decade in both the U.S. and Britain (and, subsequently, around the world).\n\nA bonus round (also known as a bonus game or an end game) usually follows a main game as a bonus to the winner of that game. In the bonus round, the stakes are higher and the game is considered to be tougher. \n\nThe game play of a bonus round usually varies from the standard game play of the front game, although there are often borrowed or related elements of the main game in the bonus round in order to ensure the entire show has a unified premise. Though some end games are referred to as \"bonus rounds\", many are not specifically referred to as such in games, though they fit the same general role.\n\nThere is no one formula for the format of a bonus round. There are differences in almost every bonus round, though there are many recurring elements from show to show. The bonus round is often played for the show's top prize.\n\nUntil the 1960s, most game shows did not offer a bonus round. In traditional two-player formats, the winner — if a game show's rules provided for this — became the champion and simply played a new challenger either on the next show or after the commercial break.\n\nOne of the earliest forms of bonus rounds was the Jackpot Round of the original series \"Beat the Clock\". After two rounds of performing stunts, the wife of the contestant couple would perform at a jackpot board for a prize. The contestant was shown a famous quotation or common phrase, and the words were scrambled. To win the announced bonus, the contestant had to unscramble the words within 20 seconds. The contestant received a consolation gift worth over $200 if she was unsuccessful.\n\nAnother early bonus round ended each episode of \"You Bet Your Life\" with the team who won the most money answering one final question for a jackpot which started at $1,000 and increased $500 each week until won.\n\nAnother early example was the Lightning Round on the word game \"Password\", starting in 1961. The contestant who won the front game played a quick-fire series of passwords within 60 seconds, netting $50 per correctly guessed word, for a maximum bonus prize of $250.\n\nThe bonus round came about after game show producer Mark Goodson was first presented \"Password\", contending that it was not enough to merely guess passwords during the show. \"We needed something more, and that's how the Lightning Round was invited,\" said Howard Felsher, who produced \"Password\" and \"Family Feud\". \"From that point on every game show had to have an end round. You'd bring a show to a network and they'd say, 'What's the endgame?' as if they had thought of it themselves.\"\n\nThe end game of \"Match Game\" served as the impetus for a completely new game show. The first part of \"Match Game\"'s bonus round, called Audience Match, asked contestants to guess how a studio audience responded to a question. In 1975, Goodson decided that this line of questioning would make a good game show of its own, and the concept eventually became \"Family Feud\".\n\n\n", "id": "13135", "title": "Game show"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13137", "text": "Grindcore\n\nGrindcore is an extreme genre of music that originated in the early to mid-1980s. It draws inspiration from some of the most abrasive-sounding genres – including hardcore punk, thrash metal, crust punk, industrial and noise rock. Grindcore is characterized by a noise-filled sound that uses heavily distorted, down-tuned guitars, grinding overdriven bass, high speed tempo, blast beats, and vocals which consist of growls and high-pitched shrieks. Early groups like Napalm Death are credited with laying the groundwork for the style. It is most prevalent today in North America and Europe, with popular contributors such as Brutal Truth and Nasum. Lyrical themes range from a primary focus on social and political concerns, to gory subject matter and black humor.\n\nA trait of grindcore is the \"microsong\". Several bands have produced songs that are only seconds in length. British band Napalm Death holds the Guinness World Record for shortest song ever recorded with the one-second \"You Suffer\" (1987). Many bands, such as Agoraphobic Nosebleed, record simple phrases that may be rhythmically sprawled out across an instrumental lasting only a couple of bars in length.\n\nA variety of \"microgenres\" have subsequently emerged, often labeling bands according to traits that deviate from regular grindcore, including goregrind, focused on themes of gore, and pornogrind, fixated on pornographic lyrical themes. Another offshoot is electrogrind (or cybergrind) which incorporates electronic music elements such as sampling and programmed drums. Although influential within hardcore and extreme metal, grindcore remains an underground form of music.\n\nGrindcore evolved as a blend of thrash metal and hardcore punk. The name derives from the fact that \"grind\" is a British term for \"thrash\"; that term was appended to \"-core\" from \"hardcore\". Grindcore relies on standard hardcore punk instrumentation: electric guitar, bass and drums. However, grindcore alters the usual practices of metal or rock music in regard to song structure and tone. The vocal style is \"ranging from high-pitched shrieks to low, throat-shredding growls and barks.\" In some cases, no clear lyrics exist. Vocals may be used as merely an added sound effect, a common practice with bands such as the experimental Naked City.\n\nA characteristic of some grindcore songs is the \"microsong,\" lasting only a few seconds. In 2001, the \"Guinness Book of World Records\" awarded Brutal Truth the record for \"Shortest Music Video\" for 1994's \"Collateral Damage\" (the song lasts four seconds). In 2007, the video for the Napalm Death song \"You Suffer\" set a new \"Shortest Music Video\" record: 1.3 seconds. Beyond the microsong, it is characteristic of grindcore to have short songs in general; for example, Carcass' debut album \"Reek of Putrefaction\" (1988) consists of 22 tracks with an average length of 1 minute and 48 seconds. It is also not uncommon for grindcore albums to be very short when compared to other genres, usually consisting of a large track list but having a total length of only 15 to 20 minutes.\n\nMany grindcore groups experiment with down-tuned guitars. While the vinyl A-side of Napalm Death's debut, 1987's \"Scum\", is set to standard tuning, on side B, the guitars are tuned down 2½ steps. Their second album \"From Enslavement to Obliteration\" and the \"Mentally Murdered\" EP were tuned to C♯. \"Harmony Corruption\", their third full-length album, was tuned up to a D. Bolt Thrower went further, dropping 3½ steps down (A). Bass is tuned low as well, and is often distorted.\n\nThe blast beat is a drum beat characteristic of grindcore in all its forms, although its usage predates the genre itself, as it is native to jazz. In Adam MacGregor's definition, \"the blast-beat generally comprises a repeated, sixteenth-note figure played at a very fast tempo, and divided uniformly among the kick drum, snare and ride, crash, or hi-hat cymbal.\" Blast beats have been described as \"maniacal percussive explosions, less about rhythm per second than sheer sonic violence.\" Napalm Death coined the term, though this style of drumming had previously been practiced by others. Daniel Ekeroth argues that the blast beat was first performed by the Swedish group Asocial on their 1982 demo. D.R.I. (\"No Sense\"), S.O.D. (\"Milk\"), Sarcófago (\"Satanas\"), Sepultura (\"Antichrist\"), and Repulsion also included the technique prior to Napalm Death's emergence. According to some sources, it was LARM that first used the blast beat. LARM and Napalm Death became bands around the same time.\n\nGrindcore lyrics are typically provocative. A number of grindcore musicians are committed to political and ethical causes, generally leaning towards the far left in connection to grindcore's punk roots. For example, Napalm Death's songs address a variety of anarchist concerns, in the tradition of anarcho-punk. These themes include anti-racism, feminism, anti-militarism, and anti-capitalism. Other grindcore groups, such as Cattle Decapitation and Carcass, have expressed disgust with human behavior, animal abuse, and are, in some cases, vegetarians or vegans. Carcass' work in particular is often identified as the origin of the goregrind style, which is devoted to \"bodily\" themes. Groups that shift their bodily focus to sexual matters, such as Gut and the Meat Shits, are sometimes referred to as pornogrind. Seth Putnam's lyrics are notorious for their black comedy, while The Locust tend toward satirical collage, indebted to William S. Burroughs' cut-up method.\n\nThe early grindcore scene relied on an international network of tape trading and DIY production. The most widely acknowledged precursors of the grindcore sound are Siege, a hardcore punk group, and Repulsion, an early death metal outfit.\nSiege, from Weymouth, Massachusetts, were influenced by classic American hardcore (Minor Threat, Black Flag, Void) and by British groups like Discharge, Venom, and Motörhead. Siege's goal was maximum velocity: \"We would listen to the fastest punk and hardcore bands we could find and say, 'Okay, we're gonna deliberately write something that is faster than them, drummer Robert Williams recalled.\n\nRepulsion is often credited with inventing the classic grind blast beat (played at 190 bpm), as well as its distinctive bass tone. Shane Embury, in particular, advocates the band as the origin of Napalm Death's later innovations. Kevin Sharp of Brutal Truth declares that \"\"Horrified\" was and still is the defining core of what grind became; a perfect mix of hardcore punk with metallic gore, speed and distortion.\"\n\nOther groups in the British grindcore scene, such as Heresy and Unseen Terror, have emphasized the influence of American hardcore punk, including Septic Death, as well as Swedish D-beat. Sore Throat cites Discharge, Disorder, and a variety of European D-beat and thrash metal groups, including Hellhammer, and American hardcore groups, such as Poison Idea and D.R.I.. Japanese hardcore, particularly GISM, is also mentioned by a number of originators of the style. Other key groups cited by current and former members of Napalm Death as formative influences include Discharge, Amebix, Throbbing Gristle, and the aforementioned Dirty Rotten Imbeciles. Post-punk, such as Killing Joke and Joy Division, was also cited as an influence on early Napalm Death.\n\nGrindcore, as such, was developed during the mid-1980s in the United Kingdom by Napalm Death, a group who emerged from the anarcho-punk scene in Birmingham, England. While their first recordings were in the vein of Crass, they eventually became associated with crust punk. The group began to take on increasing elements of thrashcore, post-punk, and power electronics. The group also went through many changes in personnel. A major shift in style took place after Mick Harris became the group's drummer. Punk historian Ian Glasper indicates that \"For several months gob-smacked audiences weren't sure whether Napalm Death were actually a serious band any longer, such was the undeniable novelty of their hyper-speed new drummer.\" Albert Mudrian's research suggests that the name \"grindcore\" was coined by Harris. When asked about coming up with the term, Harris said:\n\nOther sources contradict Harris' claim. In a \"Spin\" magazine article written about the genre, Steven Blush declares that \"the man often credited\" for dubbing the style grindcore was Shane Embury, Napalm Death's bassist since 1987. Embury offers his own account of how the grindcore \"sound\" came to be:\n\nEarache Records founder Digby Pearson concurs with Embury, saying that Napalm Death \"put hardcore and metal through an accelerator.\" Pearson, however, said that grindcore \"wasn't just about the speed of [the] drums, blast beats, etc.\" He claimed that \"it actually was coined to describe the guitars - heavy, downtuned, bleak, harsh riffing guitars [that] 'grind', so that's what the genre was described as, by the musicians who were its innovators [and] proponents.\"\n\nWhile abrasive, grindcore achieved a measure of mainstream visibility. \"New Musical Express\" featured Napalm Death on their cover in 1988, declaring them \"the fastest band in the world.\" As James Hoare, deputy editor of \"Terrorizer\", writes:\nNapalm Death's seismic impact inspired other British grindcore groups in the 1980s, among them Extreme Noise Terror, Carcass and Sore Throat. Extreme Noise Terror, from Ipswich, formed in 1984. With the goal of becoming \"the most extreme hardcore punk band of all time,\" the group took Mick Harris from Napalm Death in 1987. Ian Glasper describes the group as \"pissed-off hateful noise with its roots somewhere between early Discharge and Disorder, with [vocalists] Dean [Jones] and Phil [Vane] pushing their trademark vocal extremity to its absolute limit.\" In 1991, the group collaborated with the acid house group The KLF, appearing onstage with the group at the Brit Awards in 1992. Carcass released \"Reek of Putrefaction\" in 1988, which John Peel declared his favorite album of the year despite its very poor production. The band's focus on gore and anatomical decay, lyrically and in sleeve artwork, inspired the goregrind subgenre. Sore Throat, said by Ian Glasper to have taken \"perhaps the most uncompromisingly anti-music stance\" were inspired by crust punk as well as industrial music. Some listeners, such as Digby Pearson, considered them to be simply an in-joke or parody of grindcore.\n\nIn the subsequent decade, two pioneers of the style became increasingly commercially viable. According to Nielsen Soundscan, Napalm Death sold 367,654 units between May 1991 and November 2003, while Carcass sold 220,374 units in the same period. The inclusion of Napalm Death's \"Twist the Knife (Slowly)\" on the \"Mortal Kombat\" soundtrack brought the band much greater visibility, as the compilation scored a Top 10 position in the \"Billboard\" 200 chart and went platinum in less than a year. The originators of the style have expressed some ambivalence regarding the subsequent popularity of grindcore. Pete Hurley, the guitarist of Extreme Noise Terror, declared that he had no interest in being remembered as a pioneer of this style: \"'grindcore' was a legendarily stupid term coined by a hyperactive kid from the West Midlands, and it had nothing to do with us whatsoever. ENT were, are, and - I suspect - always will be a hardcore punk band... not a grindcore band, a stenchcore band, a trampcore band, or any other sub-sub-sub-core genre-defining term you can come up with.\" Lee Dorian of Napalm Death indicated that \"Unfortunately, I think the same thing happened to grindcore, if you want to call it that, as happened to punk rock - all the great original bands were just plagiarised by a billion other bands who just copied their style identically, making it no longer original and no longer extreme.\"\n\nJournalist Kevin Stewart-Panko argues that the American grindcore of the 1990s borrowed from three sources: British grindcore, the American precursors, and death metal. As early Napalm Death albums were not widely distributed in the United States, American groups tended to take inspiration from later works, such as \"Harmony Corruption\". American groups also often employ riffs taken from crossover thrash or thrash metal. Early American grind practitioners included Terrorizer and Assück. Anal Cunt, a particularly dissonant group who lacked a bass player, were also particularly influential. Their style was sometimes referred to as \"noisecore\" or \"noisegrind\", described by Giulio of Cripple Bastards as \"the most anti-musical and nihilistic face of extreme music at that time.\" Brutal Truth was a groundbreaking group in the American scene at the beginning of the 1990s.\n\nHowever, Sharp indicates that they were more inspired by the thrash metal of Dark Angel than the British groups. Discordance Axis had a more technical style of playing than many of the predecessors, and had a much more ornate visual and production style. Scott Hull is prominent in the contemporary grindcore scene, through his participation in Pig Destroyer and Agoraphobic Nosebleed. ANb's \"Frozen Corpse Stuffed with Dope\" has been described as \"the \"Paul's Boutique\" of grindcore\", by \"Village Voice\" critic Phil Freeman, for its \"hyper-referential, impossibly dense barrage of samples, blast beats, answering machine messages, and incomprehensibly bellowed rants.\" Pig Destroyer is inspired by thrash metal, such as Dark Angel and Slayer, the sludge metal of The Melvins, and grindcore practiced by Brutal Truth, while Agoraphobic Nosebleed takes cues from thrashcore and powerviolence, like D.R.I. and Crossed Out. Pig Destroyer's style is sometimes referred to as \"deathgrind\", because of the prevalence of death metal influences, as are Cattle Decapitation.\n\nThe Locust, from San Diego, also take inspiration from powerviolence (Crossed Out, Dropdead), first-wave screamo (Angel Hair), obscure experimental rock (Art Bears, Renaldo and the Loaf), and death metal. The Locust were sometimes described as \"hipster grind\" because of their fan base and fashion choices. In Los Angeles, Hole also initially drew influence from grindcore in their early releases, particularly on their singles \"Dicknail\" and \"Teenage Whore\", as well as on their debut album, \"Pretty on the Inside\" (1991), all of which featured sexually provocative and violent lyrics, as well as the heavy distortion and fluctuating tempo that distinguished the genre. Frontwoman Courtney Love stated that she wanted to capture the distinguishing elements of grindcore while incorporating more pop-based melodic structure, although the band distanced themselves from the style in their later releases.\n\nOther later prominent grindcore groups of North America include Brujeria, Soilent Green, Cephalic Carnage, Impetigo, and Circle of Dead Children. Fuck the Facts, a Canadian group, practice classic grindcore, characterized by the \"metronome-precision drumming and riffing [that] abound, as well as vocal screams and growls\" by \"AllMusic\" reviewer Greg Prato.\n\nEuropean groups, such as Agathocles, from Belgium, Patareni, of Croatia, and Fear of God, from Switzerland, are important early practitioners of the style. Filthy Christians, who signed to Earache Records in 1989, introduced the style in Sweden, D.D.T. & Fear of Dog were pioneering grind & noise in Serbia since mid-end of '80, Extreme Smoke 57 in Slovenia at the early beginning of the '90, while Cripple Bastards established Italian grindcore. Giulio of Cripple Bastards asserts that the name itself took some time to migrate from Britain, with the style being referred to as \"death-thrashcore\" for a time in Europe.\nNasum, who emerged from the Swedish death metal scene, became a popular group, addressing political topics from a personal perspective.\n\nAnders Jakobson, their drummer, reported that \"It was all these different types of people who enjoyed what we were doing. [...] We made grindcore a bit easier to listen to at the expense of the diehard grindcore fans who thought that we were, well, not sellouts, but not really true to the original essence of grindcore.\" Other Swedish groups, such as General Surgery and Regurgitate, practiced goregrind. Inhume, from the Netherlands, Rotten Sound, from Finland, and Leng Tch'e, from Belgium, were subsequent European groups who practiced grindcore with death metal inflections. In 2000s, the Belgium-based Aborted \"had grown into the role of key contributors to the death-grind genres\".\n\nJapanese noise rock group Boredoms have borrowed elements of grind, and toured with Brutal Truth in 1993. The Japanese grindcore group Gore Beyond Necropsy formed in 1989, and later collaborated with noise music artist Merzbow. Naked City, led by avant-garde jazz saxophonist John Zorn, performed an avant-garde form of polystylistic, grindcore-influenced punk jazz. Zorn later formed the Painkiller project with ambient dub producer Bill Laswell on bass guitar and Mick Harris on drums, which also collaborated with Justin Broadrick on some work. In addition, grindcore was one influence on the powerviolence movement within American hardcore punk, and has affected some strains of metalcore. Some musicians have also produced hybrids between grind and electronic music.\n\nPowerviolence is a raw and dissonant subgenre of hardcore punk. The style is closely related to thrashcore and similar to grindcore. While powerviolence took inspiration from Napalm Death and other early grind bands, powerviolence groups avoided elements of heavy metal. Its nascent form was pioneered in the late 1980s in the music of hardcore punk band Infest, who mixed youth crew hardcore elements with noisier, sludgier qualities of Lärm and Siege. The microgenre solidified into its most commonly recognized form in the early 1990s, with the sounds of bands such as Man Is the Bastard, Crossed Out, No Comment, Capitalist Casualties, and Manpig.\n\nPowerviolence bands focus on speed, brevity, bizarre timing breakdowns, and constant tempo changes. Powerviolence songs are often very short; it is not uncommon for some to last less than 30 seconds. Some groups, particularly Man Is the Bastard, took influence from sludge metal and noise music. Lyrically and conceptually, powerviolence groups were very raw and underproduced, both sonically and in their packaging. Some groups (Man Is the Bastard and Dropdead) took influence from anarcho-punk and crust punk, emphasizing animal rights and anti-militarism. The Locust and Agoraphobic Nosebleed later reincorporated elements of powerviolence into grindcore.\n\nAmong other influences, Napalm Death took impetus from the industrial music scene. Subsequently, Napalm Death's former guitarist, Justin Broadrick, went on to a career in industrial metal with Godflesh. Mick Harris, in his post-Napalm Death project, Scorn, briefly experimented with the style. Scorn also worked in the industrial hip hop and isolationist styles. Fear Factory have also cited debts to the genre. Digital hardcore is an initially German hybrid of hardcore punk and hardcore techno. Agoraphobic Nosebleed and the Locust have solicited remixes from digital hardcore producers and noise musicians. James Plotkin, Dave Witte, and Speedranch participated in the Phantomsmasher project, which melds grindcore and digital hardcore. Alec Empire collaborated with Justin Broadrick, on the first Curse of the Golden Vampire album, and with Gabe Serbian, of the Locust, live in Japan. Japanoise icon Merzbow also participated in the Empire/Serbian show.\n\nThe 21st century also saw the development of \"electrogrind\" (or \"cybergrind\"), practiced by The Berzerker, Body Hammer, Gigantic Brain and Genghis Tron which borrows from electronic music. These groups built on the work of Agoraphobic Nosebleed, Enemy Soil and The Locust, as well as industrial metal. The Berzerker also appropriated the distorted Roland TR-909 kick drums of gabber producers. Many later electrogrind groups were caricatured for their hipster connections.\n\nIn the mid-1990s, mathcore groups such as The Dillinger Escape Plan, Some Girls, and Daughters began to take inspiration from developments in grindcore. These groups also include elements of post-hardcore. In addition to mathcore some early screamo groups, like Circle Takes the Square and Orchid, have been associated with grindcore by some commentators.\n\n\n", "id": "13137", "title": "Grindcore"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13140", "text": "George Frederick, Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach\n\nGeorge Frederick of Brandenburg-Ansbach (; 5 April 1539 in Ansbach – 25 April 1603) was Margrave of Ansbach and Bayreuth, as well as Regent of Prussia. He was the son of George, Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach and a member of the House of Hohenzollern. He married firstly, in 1559, Elisabeth of Brandenburg-Küstrin (29 August 1540 – 8 March 1578). He married secondly, in 1579, Sophie of Brunswick-Lüneburg (30 October 1563 – 1639), daughter of William of Brunswick-Lüneburg and Dorothea of Denmark.\n\nGeorge Frederick reigned in his native Ansbach, Franconia and Jägerndorf, Upper Silesia since 1556 and, after the death of his cousin Albert Alcibiades in 1557, also in Kulmbach. He took over the administration of the Duchy of Prussia in 1577, when the then-reigning Duke Albert Frederick became ill.\n\nHe was the last of the older Franconia line of the House of Hohenzollern. Upon his death Ansbach and Kulmbach were inherited by younger princes of the Brandenburg line according to the House Treaty of Gera of 1598.\n\nGeorge Frederick rebuilt the palace and fortress Plassenburg, which was destroyed after the second margravian war (1552–1554), as one of the most impressive residences of the renaissance in the German empire. He also built the fortress Wülzburg and the old palace in Bayreuth.\n\nDuring his reign between 1557 and 1603 in the Franconian territories of the Hohenzollern (Brandenburg-Ansbach and Brandenburg-Kulmbach) he kept peace, rebuilt cities and Castles, founded several schools and a University.\n\n \n", "id": "13140", "title": "George Frederick, Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13141", "text": "George, Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach\n\nGeorge of Brandenburg-Ansbach () (4 March 1484 – 27 December 1543), known as George the Pious, was a Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach from the House of Hohenzollern.\n\nHe was born in Ansbach, the third of eight sons of Margrave Frederick the Elder and his wife Sophia of Poland, daughter of Casimir IV of Poland and Elisabeth of Habsburg. Through his mother, he was related to the royal court in Buda. He entered the service of his uncle, King Vladislaus II of Bohemia and Hungary, living at his court from 1506. The king received him as an adopted son, entrusted him in 1515 with the Duchy of Oppeln, and in 1516 made him member of the tutelary government instituted for Hungary, and tutor of his son Louis II of Hungary and Bohemia. In 1521 he made an arrangement with Petar Keglević and pulled back from Hungary and Croatia; this arrangement, accepted by Louis II in 1526, was not accepted by Holy Roman Emperor Ferdinand I until 1559.\n\nAt the court of Hungary there were two parties arrayed against each other: the Magyar party under the leadership of Zápolyas and the German party under the leadership of George of Brandenburg, whose authority was increased by the acquisition of the duchies of Ratibor and Oppeln by hereditary treaties with their respective dukes and of the territories of Oderberg, Beuthen, and Tarnowitz as pledges from the king of Bohemia, who could not redeem his debts.\n\nBy the further appropriation of the Duchy of Jägerndorf, George came into possession of all Upper Silesia. As the owner and mortgagee of these territories he prepared the way for the introduction of the Protestant Reformation, here as well as in his native Franconia. Earlier than any other German prince or any other member of the Hohenzollern line including even his younger brother Albert, the Grand Master of the Teutonic Order, he turned his eyes and heart to the new faith proceeding from Wittenberg.\n\nThe first reformatory writings began the work of winning him over to the evangelical cause. Martin Luther's powerful testimony of faith at the Diet of Worms in 1521 made an indelible impression upon his mind, and the vigorous sermons of evangelical preachers in the pulpits of St. Lawrence and St. Sebald in Nuremberg, during the diet there in 1522, deepened the impression. The study of Luther's translation of the New Testament, which appeared in 1522, established his faith on personal conviction. Moreover, he entered into correspondence with Luther, discussing with him the most important problems of faith, and in 1524 he met him personally during the negotiations concerning his brother Albert's secularization of the Teutonic Order's state of Prussia into the secular Duchy of Prussia.\n\nAfter the accession of King Louis II, George was aided in his reforming efforts by Queen Maria, a sister of Charles V and Ferdinand I, who was favorably inclined toward the new doctrine. As the adviser of the young king, George firmly advocated the cause of the new gospel against the influences and intrigues of his clerical opponents and successfully prevented their violent measures. His relationship with Duke Frederick II of Liegnitz, Brieg, and Wohlau, and with Duke Charles I of Münsterberg-Oels, who had both admitted the Reformation into their territories, contributed not a little to the expansion of the gospel in his own lands. But it was his own personal influence, energy, and practical spirit that introduced the new doctrine and founded a new evangelical and churchly life. He made efforts to secure preachers of the new gospel from Hungary, Silesia, and Franconia, and tried to introduce the church order of Brandenburg-Nuremberg, which had already found acceptance in the Franconian territories.\n\nIn the hereditary lands Brandenburg-Ansbach in Franconia, where with his older brother Casimir of Brandenburg-Kulmbach he had assumed the regency in place of their father, he encountered greater difficulties, although the popular spirit was inclined toward the Reformation. Owing to his marriage with a Bavarian princess and to his military command in the imperial service, his brother was allied more closely with the old church and resisted the new reforming efforts. But the pressure of the estates of the land soon compelled him to allow preaching according to Luther's doctrine, although he ensured retention of the old church ceremonies, even of those that were contrary to the new faith.\n\nGeorge protested against such half-measures and showed his dissatisfaction with the half-hearted resolutions of the state assembly of October 1526. It was only after the death of his brother that as sole ruler he could successfully undertake and carry out reformation in the Franconian territories, with the assistance of councillors such as Johann von Schwarzenberg and through the new resolutions of the state assembly of Brandenburg-Ansbach (1528). At the same time George maintained his correspondence with Luther and Philipp Melanchthon, discussing such questions as the evangelization of monasteries, the use of monastic property for evangelical purposes, and especially the foundation of lower schools for the people and of higher schools for the education of talented young men for the service of church and state. He tried to gain, by his continued correspondence with Luther and other reformers such as Urbanus Rhegius, efficient men for the preaching of the gospel and for the organization of the evangelical church. Hand in hand with the Council of Nuremberg he worked for the institution of a church visitation on the model of that of the Electorate of Saxony, from which after repeated revisions and emendations the excellent church order of Brandenburg-Nuremberg of 1533 was developed. After its introduction in Nuremberg and his territories in Franconia, it was also introduced in his dominions in Upper Silesia.\n\nGeorge's influence manifested itself also in the development of the German Reformation as a whole. When a union of the evangelicals in upper and lower Germany was contemplated as a means of improved defense against the retaliatory measures of the Roman Catholic Church, George had a meeting with Elector John of Saxony at Schleitz in 1529, where they agreed on certain articles of faith and confession to be drawn up by Luther; the commission was executed in the seventeen articles of Schwabach on the basis of the fifteen theses of the Marburg Colloquy.\n\nBut neither at the Convention of Schwabach nor at that of Schmalkalden did George approve armed resistance against the emperor and his party, even in self-defense. He opposed the emperor energetically at the Diet of Augsburg in 1530, when the emperor demanded the prohibition of evangelical preaching. King Ferdinand made George the most alluring offers of Silesian possessions if he would support the emperor, but he strongly rejected them. Next to the elector of Saxony, he stands foremost among the princes who defended the reformed faith. After the death of his cousin, Joachim I, who was a strict Romanist, he assisted his sons in the introduction of the Reformation in the territories of the Electorate of Brandenburg. He took part in the religious colloquy of Regensburg in 1541 where Elector Joachim II made a last attempt to bridge the differences between the Romanists and evangelicals and with his nephew requested Luther's cooperation. The Diet of Regensburg was the last religious meeting which he attended.\n\nHe is one of the figures on the \"Prussian Homage\" painting by Jan Matejko.\n\nGeorge went on to marry three times: First to Beatrice de Frangepan (1480 – c.1510); the marriage produced no children.\n\nGeorge's second wife was Hedwig of Münsterberg-Oels (1508–1531), daughter of Charles I of Münsterberg-Oels; their marriage produced two daughters:\n\nHis third wife was Emilie of Saxony (July 27, 1516 – March 9, 1591), daughter of Henry IV, Duke of Saxony and Catherine of Mecklenburg on August 25, 1533:\n\n \n", "id": "13141", "title": "George, Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13143", "text": "Generalized mean\n\nIn mathematics, generalized means are a family of functions for aggregating sets of numbers, that include as special cases the Pythagorean means (arithmetic, geometric, and harmonic means). The generalized mean is also known as power mean or Hölder mean (named after Otto Hölder).\n\nIf \"p\" is a non-zero real number, and formula_1 are positive real numbers, then the generalized mean or power mean with exponent \"p\" of these positive real numbers is:\n\nNote the relationship to the \"p\"-norm. For we assume that it is equal to the geometric mean (which is the limit of means with exponents approaching zero, as proved below for the general case):\n\nFurthermore, for a sequence of positive weights \"w\" with sum formula_4 we define the weighted power mean as:\n\nThe unweighted means correspond to setting all .\n\n\nIn general, \n\nand the two means are equal if and only if \"x\" = \"x\" = ... = \"x\".\n\nThe inequality is true for real values of \"p\" and \"q\", as well as positive and negative infinity values.\n\nIt follows from the fact that, for all real \"p\",\n\nwhich can be proved using Jensen's inequality.\n\nIn particular, for \"p\" in {−1, 0, 1}, the generalized mean inequality implies the Pythagorean means inequality as well as the inequality of arithmetic and geometric means.\n\nWe will prove weighted power means inequality, for the purpose of the proof we will assume the following without loss of generality:\n\nProof for unweighted power means is easily obtained by substituting \"w\" = 1/\"n\".\n\nSuppose an average between power means with exponents \"p\" and \"q\" holds:\n\napplying this, then:\n\nWe raise both sides to the power of −1 (strictly decreasing function in positive reals):\n\nWe get the inequality for means with exponents −\"p\" and −\"q\", and we can use the same reasoning backwards, thus proving the inequalities to be equivalent, which will be used in some of the later proofs.\n\nFor any \"q > 0\", and non-negative weights summing to \"1\", the following inequality holds\n\nThe proof is as follows. From Jensen's inequality, making use of the fact the logarithmic function is concave:\n\nBy applying the exponential function to both sides and observing that as a strictly increasing function it preserves the sign of the inequality, we get\n\nand taking \"q\"th powers of the \"x\", we are done for the inequality with positive \"q\", and the case for negatives is identical.\n\nWe are to prove that for any \"p\" < \"q\" the following inequality holds:\n\nif \"p\" is negative, and \"q\" is positive, the inequality is equivalent to the one proved above:\n\nThe proof for positive \"p\" and \"q\" is as follows: Define the following function: \"f\" : R → R formula_19. \"f\" is a power function, so it does have a second derivative:\n\nwhich is strictly positive within the domain of \"f\", since \"q\" > \"p\", so we know \"f\" is convex.\n\nUsing this, and the Jensen's inequality we get:\n\nafter raising both side to the power of 1/\"q\" (an increasing function, since 1/\"q\" is positive) we get the inequality which was to be proven:\n\nUsing the previously shown equivalence we can prove the inequality for negative \"p\" and \"q\" by substituting them with, respectively, −\"q\" and −\"p\", QED.\n\nThe power mean could be generalized further to the generalized \"f\"-mean:\n\nThis covers the geometric mean without using a limit with \"f\"(\"x\") = \"log\"(\"x\"). The power mean is obtained for \"f\"(\"x\") = \"x\".\n\nA power mean serves a non-linear moving average which is shifted towards small signal values for small \"p\" and emphasizes big signal values for big \"p\". Given an efficient implementation of a moving arithmetic mean called codice_1 one can implement a moving power mean according to the following Haskell code.\n\n\n\n", "id": "13143", "title": "Generalized mean"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13145", "text": "Gerolamo Cardano\n\nGerolamo (or Girolamo, or Geronimo) Cardano (; ; ; 24 September 1501 – 21 September 1576) was an Italian polymath, whose interests and proficiencies ranged from being a mathematician, physician, biologist, physicist, chemist, astrologer, astronomer, philosopher, writer, and gambler. He was one of the most influential mathematicians of the Renaissance, and was one of the key figures in the foundation of probability and the earliest introducer of the binomial coefficients and the binomial theorem in the western world. He wrote more than 200 works on science.\n\nCardano partially invented and described several mechanical devices including the combination lock, the gimbal consisting of three concentric rings allowing a supported compass or gyroscope to rotate freely, and the Cardan shaft with universal joints, which allows the transmission of rotary motion at various angles and is used in vehicles to this day. He made significant contributions to hypocycloids, published in \"De proportionibus\", in 1570. The generating circles of these hypocycloids were later named Cardano circles or cardanic circles and were used for the construction of the first high-speed printing presses.\n\nToday, he is well known for his achievements in algebra. He made the first systematic use of negative numbers, published with attribution the solutions of other mathematicians for the cubic and quartic equations, and acknowledged the existence of imaginary numbers.\n\nHe was born in Pavia, Lombardy, the illegitimate child of Fazio Cardano, a mathematically gifted jurist, lawyer, a close personal friend of Leonardo da Vinci. In his autobiography, Cardano wrote that his mother, Chiara Micheri, had taken \"various abortive medicines\" to terminate the pregnancy; he was \"taken by violent means from my mother; I was almost dead.\" She was in labour for three days. Shortly before his birth, his mother had to move from Milan to Pavia to escape the Plague; her three other children died from the disease.\n\nAfter a depressing childhood, with frequent illnesses and the rough upbringing by his overbearing father, in 1520, Cardano entered the University of Pavia against his father's wish, who wanted his son to undertake studies of law, but Girolamo felt more attracted to philosophy and science. During the ongoing war between France and Spain, the authorities in Pavia were forced to close the university, Cardano resumed his studies at the University of Padua, where he graduated in medicine in 1526. His eccentric and confrontational style did not earn him many friends and he had a difficult time finding work after his studies had ended. In 1525, Cardano repeatedly applied to the College of Physicians in Milan, but was not admitted owing to his combative reputation and illegitimate birth. He suffered from impotence throughout the early part of his life, but recovered and married Lucia Banderini in 1531. Before her death in 1546, she bore him three children, Giovanni Battista (1534), Chiara (1537) and Aldo (1543).\n\nCardano was the first mathematician to make systematic use of numbers less than zero. He published with attribution the solution of Scipione del Ferro to the cubic equation and the solution of his student Lodovico Ferrari to the quartic equation in his 1545 book \"Ars Magna\". The solution to one particular case of the cubic equation formula_1 (in modern notation), had been communicated to him by Niccolò Fontana Tartaglia (who later claimed that Cardano had sworn not to reveal it, and engaged Cardano in a decade-long dispute) in the form of a poem, but Ferro's solution predated Fontana's. In his exposition, he acknowledged the existence of what are now called imaginary numbers, although he did not understand their properties, described for the first time by his Italian contemporary Rafael Bombelli. In \"Opus novum de proportionibus\" he introduced the binomial coefficients and the binomial theorem.\n\nCardano was notoriously short of money and kept himself solvent by being an accomplished gambler and chess player. His book about games of chance, \"Liber de ludo aleae\" (\"Book on Games of Chance\"), written around 1564, but not published until 1663, contains the first systematic treatment of probability, as well as a section on effective cheating methods. He used the game of throwing dice to understand the basic concepts of probability. He demonstrated the efficacy of defining odds as the ratio of favourable to unfavourable outcomes (which implies that the probability of an event is given by the ratio of favourable outcomes to the total number of possible outcomes). He was also aware of the multiplication rule for independent events but was not certain about what values should be multiplied.\n\nCardano's work with hypocycloids led him to the \"Cardan gear mechanism,\" in which a pair of gears with the smaller being one-half the size of the larger gear is used converting rotational motion to linear motion, with greater efficiency and precision than a Scotch yoke, for example.\n\nCardano made several contributions to hydrodynamics and held that perpetual motion is impossible, except in celestial bodies. He published two encyclopedias of natural science which contain a wide variety of inventions, facts, and occult superstitions. He also introduced the Cardan grille, a cryptographic tool, in 1550.\n\nSomeone also assigned to Cardano the credit for the invention of the so-called \"Cardano's Rings\", also called Chinese Rings, but it is very probable that they predate Cardano.\n\nSignificantly, in the history of education of the deaf, he said that deaf people were capable of using their minds, argued for the importance of teaching them, and was one of the first to state that deaf people could learn to read and write without learning how to speak first. He was familiar with a report by Rudolph Agricola about a deaf mute who had learned to write.\n\nAs quoted from Charles Lyell's \"Principles of Geology\":\n\nThe title of a work of Cardano's, published in 1552, \"De Subtilitate\" (corresponding to what would now be called transcendental philosophy), would lead us to expect, in the chapter on minerals, many far fetched theories characteristic of that age; but when treating of petrified shells, he decided that they clearly indicated the former sojourn of the sea upon the mountains.\nCardano had two children—Giovanni and Aldo Battista—both of whom came to ignoble ends. Giovanni Battista, Cardano's eldest and favorite son, was tried and beheaded in 1560 for poisoning his wife, after he discovered that their three children were not his. Aldo Battista was a gambler, who stole money from his father and was disinherited by him in 1569.\n\nCardano moved from Pavia to Bologna, in part because he believed that the decision to execute Giovanni was influenced by his battles with the academic establishment in Pavia, and his colleagues' jealousy at his scientific achievements and also because he was beset with allegations of sexual impropriety with his students. Cardano was arrested by the Inquisition in 1570 for unknown reasons, and forced to spend several months in prison and abjure his professorship. He moved to Rome, and received a lifetime annuity from Pope Gregory XIII (after first having been rejected by Pope Pius V) and finished his autobiography. He was accepted in the Royal College of Physicians, and as well as practising medicine he continued his philosophical studies until his death in 1576.\n\nThe seventeenth century English physician and philosopher Sir Thomas Browne once possessed the ten volumes of the Leyden 1663 edition of the complete works of Cardan in his library.\n\nBrowne critically viewed Cardan as-\n\n\"that famous Physician of Milan, a great Enquirer of Truth, but too greedy a Receiver of it. He hath left many excellent Discourses, Medical, Natural, and Astrological; the most suspicious are those two he wrote by admonition in a dream, that is \"De Subtilitate & Varietate Rerum\". Assuredly this learned man hath taken many things upon trust, and although examined some, hath let slip many others. He is of singular use unto a prudent Reader; but unto him that only desireth Hoties, or to replenish his head with varieties; like many others before related, either in the Original or confirmation, he may become no small occasion of Error.\n\nRichard Hinckley Allen tells of an amusing reference made by Samuel Butler in his book \"Hudibras\":\n\n<poem>\nCardan believ'd great states depend\nUpon the tip o'th' Bear's tail's end;\nThat, as she wisk'd it t'wards the Sun,\nStrew'd mighty empires up and down;\nWhich others say must needs be false,\nBecause your true bears have no tails.\n</poem>\n\nAlessandro Manzoni's novel \"I Promessi Sposi\" portrays a pedantic scholar of the obsolete, Don Ferrante, as a great admirer of Cardano. Significantly, he values him only for his superstitious and astrological writings; his scientific writings are dismissed because they contradict Aristotle, but excused on the ground that the author of the astrological works deserves to be listened to even when he is wrong.\n\nEnglish novelist E. M. Forster's \"Abinger Harvest\", a 1936 volume of essays, authorial reviews and a play, provides a sympathetic treatment of Cardano in the section titled 'The Past'. Forster believes Cardano was so absorbed in \"self-analysis that he often forgot to repent of his bad temper, his stupidity, his licentiousness, and love of revenge\" (212).\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "13145", "title": "Gerolamo Cardano"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13146", "text": "Gabbro\n\nGabbro () refers to a large group of dark, often phaneritic (coarse-grained), mafic intrusive igneous rocks chemically equivalent to basalt. It forms when molten magma is trapped beneath the Earth's surface and slowly cools into a holocrystalline mass.\n\nMuch of the Earth's oceanic crust is made of gabbro, formed at mid-ocean ridges. Gabbro is also found as plutons associated with continental volcanism. Due to its variant nature, the term \"gabbro\" may be applied loosely to a wide range of intrusive rocks, many of which are merely \"gabbroic\". \n\nThe term \"gabbro\" was used in the 1760s to name a set of rock types that were found in the ophiolites of the Apennine Mountains in Italy. Then, in 1809, the German geologist Christian Leopold von Buch used the term more restrictively in his description of these Italian ophiolitic rocks. He assigned the name \"gabbro\" to rocks that geologists nowadays would more strictly call \"metagabbro\" (metamorphosed gabbro). Von Buch named gabbro after Gabbro, a village in Rosignano Marittimo municipality of Tuscany.\n\nGabbro is dense, greenish or dark-colored and contains pyroxene, plagioclase, and minor amounts of amphibole and olivine.\n\nThe pyroxene content is mostly clinopyroxene, generally augite, but small amounts of orthopyroxene may also be present. If the amount of orthopyroxene is more than 95% of the total pyroxene content (5% or less clinopyroxene content), then the rock is termed norite. On the other hand, gabbro has more than 95% of its pyroxenes in the form of the monoclinic clinopyroxene/s. Intermediate rocks are termed gabbro-norite. The calcium rich plagioclase feldspar (labradorite-bytownite) and pyroxene content vary between 10% - 90% in gabbro. If more than 90% plagioclase is present, then the rock is an anorthosite. If on the other hand, the rock contains more than 90% pyroxenes (often both are present), it is termed pyroxenite. Gabbro may also contain small amounts of olivine (\"olivine gabbro\" if substantial amount of olivine is present), amphibole and biotite. The quartz content in gabbro is less than 5% of total volume. 'Quartz gabbros' or monzogabbros are also known to occur, for example the \"cizlakite\" at Pohorje in northeastern Slovenia, and are probably derived from magma that was over-saturated with silica. Essexites represent gabbros whose parent magma was under-saturated with silica, resulting in the formation of the feldspathoid minerals nepheline, cancrinite, and sodalite as accessory minerals rather than quartz. (Silica saturation of a rock can be evaluated by normative mineralogy). Gabbros contain minor amounts, typically a few percent, of iron-titanium oxides such as magnetite, ilmenite, and ulvospinel.\n\nGabbro is generally coarse grained, with crystals in the size range of 1 mm or greater. Finer grained equivalents of gabbro are called diabase (also known as dolerite), although the term \"microgabbro\" is often used when extra descriptiveness is desired. Gabbro may be extremely coarse grained to pegmatitic, and some pyroxene-plagioclase cumulates are essentially coarse grained gabbro, some may exhibit acicular crystal habits.\n\nGabbro is usually equigranular in texture, although it may be porphyritic at times, especially when plagioclase oikocrysts have grown earlier than the groundmass minerals.\n\nGabbro can be formed as a massive, uniform intrusion via in-situ crystallisation of pyroxene and plagioclase, or as part of a layered intrusion as a cumulate formed by settling of pyroxene and plagioclase. Cumulate gabbros are more properly termed \"pyroxene-plagioclase adcumulate\".\n\nGabbro is an essential part of the oceanic crust, and can be found in many ophiolite complexes as parts of zones III and IV (sheeted dyke zone to massive gabbro zone). Long belts of gabbroic intrusions are typically formed at proto-rift zones and around ancient rift zone margins, intruding into the rift flanks. Mantle plume hypotheses may rely on identifying mafic and ultramafic intrusions and coeval basalt volcanism.\n\nNearly all gabbros are found in plutonic bodies, but to restrict the term (as the International Union of Geological Sciences, IUGS, suggests) just to plutonic rocks is inappropriate, because gabbro may be found as a coarse- grained interior facies of certain thick lavas (see, for example). It is better to base a rock definition on descriptive characteristics of the rock rather than how or where it was formed.\n\nGabbro often contains valuable amounts of chromium, nickel, cobalt, gold, silver, platinum, and copper sulfides.\n\nOcellar (orbicular) varieties of gabbro can be used as ornamental facing stones, paving stones and it is also known by the trade name of 'black granite', which is a popular type of graveyard headstone used in funerary rites. It is also used in kitchens and their countertops, also under the misnomer of 'black granite'.\n\n\n", "id": "13146", "title": "Gabbro"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13148", "text": "Gene Roddenberry\n\nEugene Wesley \"Gene\" Roddenberry (August 19, 1921 – October 24, 1991) was an American television screenwriter and producer. He is best remembered for creating the . Born in El Paso, Texas, Roddenberry grew up in Los Angeles, where his father was a police officer. Roddenberry flew 89 combat missions in the Army Air Forces during World War II, and worked as a commercial pilot after the war. Later, he followed in his father's footsteps and joined the Los Angeles Police Department, where he also began to write scripts for television.\n\nAs a freelance writer, Roddenberry wrote scripts for \"Highway Patrol\", \"Have Gun–Will Travel\", and other series, before creating and producing his own television series \"The Lieutenant.\" In 1964, Roddenberry created \"Star Trek\", which premiered in 1966 and ran for three seasons before being cancelled. He then worked on other projects, including a string of failed television pilots. The syndication of \"Star Trek\" led to its growing popularity; this, in turn, resulted in the \"Star Trek\" feature films, on which Roddenberry continued to produce and consult. In 1987, the sequel series \"\" began airing on television in first-run syndication; Roddenberry was heavily involved in the initial development of the series, but took a less active role after the first season due to ill health. He continued to consult on the series until his death in 1991.\n\nIn 1985, he became the first TV writer with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, and he was later inducted by both the Science Fiction Hall of Fame and the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences Hall of Fame. Years after his death, Roddenberry was one of the first humans to have his ashes carried into earth orbit. The popularity of the \"Star Trek\" universe and films has inspired films, books, comic books, video games, and fan films set in the \"Star Trek\" universe.\n\nRoddenberry was born on August 19, 1921, in his parents' rented home in El Paso, Texas, the first child of Eugene Edward Roddenberry and Caroline \"Glen\" (née Goleman) Roddenberry. The family moved to Los Angeles in 1923 after Gene's father passed the Civil Service test and was given a police commission there. During his childhood, Roddenberry was interested in reading, especially pulp magazines, and was a fan of stories such as \"John Carter of Mars\", \"Tarzan\", and the \"Skylark\" series by E. E. Smith.\n\nRoddenberry majored in police science at Los Angeles City College, where he began dating Eileen-Anita Rexroat and became interested in aeronautical engineering. He obtained a pilot's license through the United States Army Air Corps-sponsored Civilian Pilot Training Program. He enlisted with the USAAC on December 18, 1941, and married Eileen on June 13, 1942. He graduated from the USAAC on August 5, 1942, when he was commissioned as a second lieutenant.\n\nHe was posted to Bellows Field, Oahu, to join the 394th Bomb Squadron, 5th Bombardment Group, of the Thirteenth Air Force, which flew the Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress. On August 2, 1943, while flying out of Espiritu Santo, the plane Roddenberry was piloting overshot the runway by and impacted trees, crushing the nose, and starting a fire, killing two men. The official report absolved Roddenberry of any responsibility. Roddenberry spent the remainder of his military career in the United States, and flew all over the country as a plane crash investigator. He was involved in a further plane crash, this time as a passenger. He was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross and the Air Medal.\n\nIn 1945, Roddenberry began flying for Pan American World Airways, including routes from New York to Johannesburg or Calcutta, the two longest Pan Am routes at the time. Listed as a resident of River Edge, New Jersey, he experienced his third crash while on the Clipper \"Eclipse\" on June 18, 1947. The plane landed in the Syrian desert, and Roddenberry dragged injured passengers out of the burning plane and led the group to get help. Fourteen people died in the crash; 11 passengers needed hospital treatment, and eight were unharmed. He resigned from Pan Am on May 15, 1948, and decided to pursue his dream of writing, particularly for the new medium of television.\n\nRoddenberry applied for a position with the Los Angeles Police Department on January 10, 1949, and spent his first 16 months in the traffic division before being transferred to the newspaper unit. This became the Public Information Division and Roddenberry became the Chief of Police's speech writer. He became technical advisor for a new television version of \"Mr. District Attorney\", which led to him writing for the show under his pseudonym \"Robert Wesley\". He began to collaborate with Ziv Television Programs, and continued to sell scripts to \"Mr. District Attorney\", in addition to Ziv's \"Highway Patrol\". In early 1956, he sold two story ideas for \"I Led Three Lives\", and he found that it was becoming increasingly difficult to be a writer and a policeman. On June 7, 1956, he resigned from the force to concentrate on his writing career.\n\nRoddenberry was promoted to head writer for \"The West Point Story\", and wrote 10 scripts for the first season, about a third of the total episodes. While working for Ziv, he pitched a series to CBS set on board a cruise ship, but they did not buy it, as he wanted to become a producer and have full creative control. He wrote another script for Ziv's series \"Harbourmaster\" titled \"Coastal Security\", and signed a contract with the company to develop a show called \"Junior Executive\" with Quinn Martin. Nothing came of the series.\n\nHe wrote scripts for a number of other series in his early years as a professional writer, including \"Bat Masterson\" and \"Jefferson Drum\". Roddenberry's episode of the series \"Have Gun – Will Travel\", \"Helen of Abajinian\", won the Writer's Guild of America award for Best Teleplay in 1958. He also continued to create series of his own, including a series based on an agent for Lloyd's of London called \"The Man from Lloyds\". He pitched a police-based series called \"Footbeat\" to CBS, Hollis Productions, and Screen Gems. It nearly made it into ABC's Sunday-night lineup, but they opted to show only Western series that night.\n\nRoddenberry was asked to write a series called \"Riverboat\", set in 1860s Mississippi. When he discovered that the producers wanted no black people on the show, he argued so much with them that he lost the job. He was also considered moving to England around this time, as Sir Lew Grade of Associated Television wanted Roddenberry to develop series and set up his own production company. Though he did not move, he leveraged the deal to land a contract with Screen Gems that included a guaranteed $100,000, and became a producer for the first time on a summer replacement for the \"Tennessee Ernie Ford Show\" titled \"The Wrangler\".\n\nScreen Gems backed Roddenberry's first attempt at creating a pilot. His series, \"The Wild Blue\", went to pilot, but was not picked up. The three main characters had names that later appeared in the \"Star Trek\" franchise: Philip Pike, Edward Jellicoe, and James T. Irvine. While working at Screen Gems, an actress, new to Hollywood, wrote to him asking for a meeting. They quickly became friends and met every few months; the woman was Majel Leigh Hudec, later known as Majel Barrett. He created a second pilot called \"333 Montgomery\" about a lawyer, played by DeForest Kelley. It was not picked up by the network, but was later rewritten as a new series called \"Defiance County\". His career with Screen Gems ended in late 1961, and shortly afterward, he had issues with his old friend Erle Stanley Gardner. The \"Perry Mason\" creator claimed that \"Defiance County\" had infringed his character Doug Selby. The two writers fell out via correspondence and stopped contacting one another, though \"Defiance County\" never proceeded past the pilot stage.\n\nIn 1961, he agreed to appear in an advertisement for MONY (Mutual of New York), as long as he had final approval. With the money from Screen Gems and other works, Eileen and he moved to 539 South Beverly Glen, near Beverly Hills. He discussed an idea about a multiethnic crew on an airship travelling the world, based on the 1961 film \"Master of the World\", with fellow writer Christopher Knopf at MGM. As the time was not right for science fiction, he began work on \"The Lieutenant\" for Arena Productions. This made it to the NBC Saturday night lineup at 7:30 pm, and premiered on September 14, 1963. The show set a new ratings record for that time slot. Roddenberry worked with several cast and crew who would later join him on \"Star Trek\", including: Gene L. Coon, star Gary Lockwood, Joe D'Agosta, Leonard Nimoy, Nichelle Nichols, and Majel Barrett. \"The Lieutenant\" was produced with the co-operation of the Pentagon, which allowed them to film at an actual Marine base. During the production of the series, Roddenberry clashed regularly with the Department of Defense over potential plots. The department withdrew its support after Roddenberry pressed ahead with a plot titled \"To Set It Right\" in which a white and a black man find a common cause in their roles as Marines. \"To Set It Right\" was the first time he worked with Nichols, and it was her first television role. The episode has been preserved at the Museum of Television and Radio in New York City. The show was not renewed after its first season. Roddenberry was already working on a new series idea. This included his ship location from \"Hawaii Passage\" and added a Horatio Hornblower character, plus the multiracial crew from his airship idea. He decided to write it as science fiction, and by March 11, 1964, he brought together a 16-page pitch. On April 24, he sent three copies and two dollars to the Writers Guild of America to register his series. He called it \"Star Trek\".\n\nWhen Roddenberry pitched \"Star Trek\" to MGM, it was warmly received, but no offer was made. He then went to Desilu Productions, but rather than being offered a one-script deal, he was hired as a producer and allowed to work on his own projects. His first was a half-hour pilot called \"Police Story\" (not to be confused with the anthology series created by Joseph Wambaugh), which was not picked up by the networks. Having not sold a pilot in five years, Desilu was having financial difficulties; its only success was \"I Love Lucy\". Roddenberry took the \"Star Trek\" idea to Oscar Katz, head of programming, and the duo immediately started work on a plan to sell the series to the networks. They took it to CBS, which ultimately passed on it. The duo later learned that CBS had been eager to find out about \"Star Trek\" because it had a science fiction series in development—\"Lost in Space\". Roddenberry and Katz next took the idea to Mort Werner at NBC, this time downplaying the science fiction elements and highlighting the links to \"Gunsmoke\" and \"Wagon Train.\" The network funded three story ideas, and selected \"The Menagerie\", which was later known as \"\", to be made into a pilot. (The other two later became episodes of the series.) While most of the money for the pilot came from NBC, the remaining costs were covered by Desilu. Roddenberry hired Dorothy Fontana, better known as D. C. Fontana, as his assistant. They had worked together previously on \"The Lieutenant,\" and she had eight script credits to her name.\n\nRoddenberry and Barrett had begun an affair by the early days of \"Star Trek\", and he specifically wrote the part of the character Number One in the pilot with her in mind; no other actresses were considered for the role. Barrett suggested Nimoy for the part of Spock. He had worked with both Roddenberry and Barrett on \"The Lieutenant\", and once Roddenberry remembered the thin features of the actor, he did not consider anyone else for the part. The remaining cast came together; filming began on November 27, 1964, and was completed on December 11. After post-production, the episode was shown to NBC executives and it was rumored that \"Star Trek\" would be broadcast at 8:00 pm on Friday nights. The episode failed to impress test audiences, and after the executives became hesitant, Katz offered to make a second pilot. On March 26, 1965, NBC ordered a new episode.\n\nRoddenberry developed several possible scripts, including \"Mudd's Women\", \"The Omega Glory\", and with the help of Samuel A. Peeples, \"Where No Man Has Gone Before\". NBC selected the last one, leading to later rumors that Peeples created \"Star Trek\", something he has always denied. Roddenberry was determined to make the crew racially diverse, which impressed actor George Takei when he came for his audition. The episode went into production on July 15, 1965, and was completed at around half the cost of \"The Cage\", since the sets were already built. Roddenberry worked on several projects for the rest of the year. In December, he decided to write lyrics to the \"Star Trek\" theme; this angered the theme's composer, Alexander Courage, as it meant that royalties would be split between them. In February 1966, NBC informed Desilu that they were buying \"Star Trek\" and that it would be included in the fall 1966 television schedule.\n\nOn May 24, the first episode of the \"Star Trek\" series went into production; Desilu was contracted to deliver 13 episodes. Five days before the first broadcast, Roddenberry appeared at the 24th World Science Fiction Convention and previewed \"Where No Man Has Gone Before\". After the episode was shown, he received a standing ovation. The first episode to air on NBC was \"The Man Trap\", on September 8, 1966, at 8:00 pm. Roddenberry was immediately concerned about the series' low ratings and wrote to Harlan Ellison to ask if he could use his name in letters to the network to save the show. Not wanting to lose a potential source of income, Ellison agreed and also sought the help of other writers who also wanted to avoid losing potential income. Roddenberry corresponded with science fiction writer Isaac Asimov about how to address the issue of Spock's growing popularity and the possibility that his character would overshadow Kirk. Asimov suggested having Kirk and Spock work together as a team \"to get people to think of Kirk when they think of Spock.\" The series was renewed by NBC, first for a full season's order, and then for a second season. An article in the \"Chicago Tribune\" quoted studio executives as stating that the letter-writing campaign had been wasted because they had already been planning to renew \"Star Trek\".\n\nRoddenberry often rewrote submitted scripts, although he did not always take credit for these. Roddenberry and Ellison fell out over \"The City on the Edge of Forever\" after Roddenberry rewrote Ellison's script to make it both financially feasible to film and usable for the series context. Even his close friend Don Ingalls had his script for \"A Private Little War\" altered drastically, and as a result, Ingalls declared that he would only be credited under the pseudonym \"Jud Crucis\" (a play on \"Jesus Christ\"), claiming he had been crucified by the process. Roddenberry's work rewriting \"\", based on footage originally shot for \"The Cage\", resulted in a Writers' Guild arbitration board hearing. The Guild ruled in his favor over John D. F. Black, the complainant. The script won a Hugo Award, but the awards board neglected to inform Roddenberry, who found out through correspondence with Asimov.\n\nAs the second season was drawing to a close, Roddenberry once again faced the threat of cancellation. He enlisted the help of Asimov, and even encouraged a student-led protest march on NBC. On January 8, 1968, a thousand students from 20 different schools across the country marched on the studio. Roddenberry began to communicate with \"Star Trek\" fan Bjo Trimble, who led a fan writing campaign to save the series. Trimble later noted that this campaign of writing to fans who had written to Desilu about the show, urging them to write NBC, had created an organized \"Star Trek\" fandom. The network received around 6,000 letters a week from fans petitioning it to renew the series. On March 1, 1968, NBC announced on air, at the end of \"The Omega Glory\", that \"Star Trek\" would return for a third season.\n\nThe network had initially planned to place \"Star Trek\" in the 7:30 pm Monday-night time slot freed up by \"The Man from U.N.C.L.E.\" completing its run. Instead, the enraged George Schlatter forced the network to insert \"Rowan and Martin's Laugh-In\" into the slot, and Roddenberry's series was moved to 10:00 pm on Fridays. Realizing the show could not survive in that time slot and burned out from arguments with the network, Roddenberry resigned from the day-to-day running of \"Star Trek\", although he continued to be credited as executive producer. Roddenberry cooperated with Stephen Edward Poe, writing as Stephen Whitfield, on the 1968 nonfiction book \"The Making of Star Trek\" for Ballantine Books, splitting the royalties evenly. Roddenberry explained to Whitfield: \"I had to get some money somewhere. I'm sure not going to get it from the profits of \"Star Trek\".\" Herbert Solow and Robert H. Justman observed that Whitfield never regretted his 50-50 deal with Roddenberry, since it gave him \"the opportunity to become the first chronicler of television's successful unsuccessful series.\" Whitfield had previously been the national advertising and promotion director for model makers Aluminum Model Toys, better known as \"AMT\", which then held the \"Star Trek\" license, and moved to run Lincoln Enterprises, Roddenberry's company set up to sell the series' merchandise.\n\nHaving stepped aside from the majority of his \"Star Trek\" duties, Roddenberry sought instead to create a film based on Asimov's \"I, Robot\" and also began work on a \"Tarzan\" script for National General Pictures. After initially requesting a budget of $2 million and being refused, Roddenberry made cuts to reduce costs to $1.2 million. When he learned they were being offered only $700,000 to shoot the film, which by now was being called a TV movie, he cancelled the deal. Meanwhile, NBC announced \"Star Trek's\" cancellation in February 1969. A similar but much smaller letter-writing campaign followed news of the cancellation. Because of the manner in which the series was sold to NBC, it left the production company $4.7 million in debt. The last episode of \"Star Trek\" aired 47 days before Neil Armstrong stepped onto the moon as part of the Apollo 11 mission, and Roddenberry declared that he would never write for television again.\n\nFollowing the cancellation of \"Star Trek,\" Roddenberry felt typecast as a producer of science fiction, despite his background in Westerns and police stories. He later described the period, saying, \"My dreams were going downhill because I could not get work after the original series was cancelled.\" He felt that he was \"perceived as the guy who made the show that was an expensive flop.\" Roddenberry had sold his interest in \"Star Trek\" to Paramount Studios in return for a third of the ongoing profits. However, this did not result in any quick financial gain; the studio was still claiming that the series was $500,000 in the red in 1982. He wrote and produced \"Pretty Maids All in a Row\" (1971), a sexploitation film directed by Roger Vadim, for MGM. The cast included Rock Hudson, Angie Dickinson, Telly Savalas, and Roddy McDowall alongside \"Star Trek\" regular James Doohan, and William J. Campbell, who had appeared as a guest in two \"Star Trek\" episodes, \"The Squire Of Gothos\" and \"The Trouble With Tribbles\". \"Variety\" was unimpressed: \"Whatever substance was in the original [novel by Francis Pollini] or screen concept has been plowed under, leaving only superficial, one-joke results.\" Herbert Solow had given Roddenberry the work as a favor, paying him $100,000 for the script.\n\nFaced with a $2,000-per-month alimony obligation as a result of his 1969 divorce, and a mortgage, he began to support himself largely by giving college lectures and appearances at science-fiction conventions. These presentations included screenings of \"The Cage\" and blooper reels from the production of \"Star Trek.\" He was paid $25,000 to write a script called \"The Nine,\" which was meant to be about paranormal experiences, but ended up being based on his experiences attempting to earn a living attending science-fiction conventions. At the time, he was close to losing his house because of the lack of income. These conventions began to build the fan support to bring back \"Star Trek,\" leading \"TV Guide\" to describe it, in 1972, as \"the show that won't die.\"\n\nIn 1972 and 1973, Roddenberry made a comeback to science fiction, selling ideas for four new series to a variety of networks. Roddenberry's \"Genesis II\" was set in a postapocalyptic Earth. He had hoped to recreate the success of \"Star Trek\" without \"doing another space-hopping show.\" He created a 45-page writing guide, and proposed several story ideas based on the concept that pockets of civilisation had regressed to past eras or changed altogether. The pilot aired as a TV movie in March 1973, setting new records for the \"Thursday Night Movie of the Week\". Roddenberry was asked to produce four more scripts for episodes, but before production could begin again, CBS aired the film \"Planet of the Apes.\" It was watched by an even greater audience than \"Genesis II.\" CBS scrapped \"Genesis II\" and replaced it with the \"Apes\" television series; the results were disastrous ratings-wise, and \"Planet Of The Apes\" was quickly cancelled.\n\n\"The Questor Tapes\" project reunited him with his \"Star Trek\" collaborator, Gene L. Coon, who was in failing health at the time. NBC ordered 16 episodes, and tentatively scheduled the series to follow \"The Rockford Files\" on Friday nights; the pilot launched on January 23, 1974, to positive critical response, but Roddenberry balked at the substantial changes requested by the network and left the project, leading to its immediate cancellation. During 1974, Roddenberry reworked the \"Genesis II\" concept as a second pilot, \"Planet Earth,\" for rival network ABC, with similar less-than-successful results. The pilot was aired on April 23, 1974. While Roddenberry wanted to create something that could feasibly exist in the future, the network wanted stereotypical science-fiction women and were unhappy when that was not delivered. Roddenberry was not involved in a third reworking of the material by ABC that produced \"Strange New World.\" He began developing \"MAGNA I,\" an underwater science-fiction series, for 20th Century Fox Television. By the time the work on the script was complete, though, those who had approved the project had left Fox and their replacements were not interested in the project. A similar fate was faced by \"Tribunes,\" a science-fiction police series, which Roddenberry attempted to get off the ground between 1973 and 1977. He gave up after four years; the series never even reached the pilot stage. The pilot for the series \"Spectre,\" Roddenberry's 1977 attempt to create an occult detective duo similar to Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson, was released as a television movie within the United States and received a limited theatrical release in the United Kingdom.\n\nLacking funds in the early 1970s, Roddenberry was unable to buy the full rights to \"Star Trek\" for $150,000 from Paramount. Lou Scheimer approached Paramount in 1973 about creating an animated \"Star Trek\" series. Credited as \"executive consultant\" and paid $2,500 per episode, Roddenberry was granted full creative control of \"\". Although he read all the scripts and \"sometimes [added] touches of his own\", he relinquished most of his authority to \"de facto\" showrunner/associate producer D. C. Fontana.\n\nRoddenberry had some difficulties with the cast. To save money, he sought not to hire George Takei and Nichelle Nichols. He neglected to inform Leonard Nimoy of this and instead, in an effort to get him to sign on, told him that he was the only member of the main cast not returning. After Nimoy discovered the deception, he demanded that Takei and Nichols play Sulu and Uhura when their characters appeared on screen. Roddenberry acquiesced. He had been promised five full seasons of the new show, but ultimately, only one and a half were produced.\n\nHowever, the groundswell of vociferous fan support (6,000 attended the second New York \"Star Trek\" convention in 1973 and 15,000 attended in 1974, much larger figures than at older events like the 4,500 at the 32nd World Science Fiction Convention in 1974) led Paramount to hire Roddenberry to create and produce a feature film based on the franchise in May 1975. The studio was unimpressed with the ideas being put forward; John D. F. Black's opinion was that their ideas were never \"big enough\" for the studio, even when one scenario involved the end of the universe. At the time, several ideas were partly developed including \"\" and \"\". Following the commercial reception of \"Star Wars\", in June 1977, Paramount instead green-lit a new series set in the franchise titled \"\", with Roddenberry and most of the original cast, except Nimoy, set to reprise their respective roles. It was to be the anchor show of a proposed Paramount-owned \"fourth network\", but plans for the network were scrapped and the project was reworked into a feature film. The result, \"\", troubled the studio because of budgetary concerns, but was a box-office hit. Adjusted for inflation, it was the third-highest grossing \"Star Trek\" movie, with the 2009 film coming in first and the second.\n\nIn 1980, Roddenberry submitted a treatment for a proposed sequel about the crew preventing the alien Klingons from thwarting the John F. Kennedy assassination. Paramount rejected it and he was replaced on the project by television producer Harve Bennett. Roddenberry was named executive consultant for the project, and was compensated with a producer's fee and a percentage of the net profits of any film projects in exchange for proffering nonbinding story notes and corresponding with the fan community. Although Roddenberry's memos were largely disregarded by Bennett and other producers, this arrangement persisted on future installments of the film series for the remainder of his life. An initial script for \"\" was circulated to eight people; Bennett attributed the subsequent plot leak of the death of Spock to Roddenberry. About 20% of the plot was based on Roddenberry's ideas.\n\nRoddenberry was involved in creating the television series \"\", which premiered with \"Encounter at Farpoint\" on September 28, 1987. He was given a bonus of $1 million in addition to an ongoing salary to produce the series, and celebrated by purchasing a new Rolls-Royce for $100,000. This did not entitle him to be executive producer of the series. However, Paramount was already concerned about the original cast not returning, and fearing fan reaction if Roddenberry was not involved, agreed to his demand for control of the show. Roddenberry rewrote the series bible from an original version by David Gerrold, who had previously written \"The Original Series\" episode \"The Trouble with Tribbles\", and \"The Animated Series\" follow-up, \"More Tribbles, More Troubles\".\n\nAccording to producer Rick Berman, \"Gene's hands-on involvement in \"The Next Generation\" diminished greatly after the first season\", but the nature of his increasingly peripheral role was not disclosed because of the value of his name to fans. While Berman said that Roddenberry had \"all but stopped writing and rewriting\" by the end of the third season, his final writing credit on the show (a co-teleplay credit) was on \"Datalore\", the 13th episode of the first season.\n\nAlthough commercially successful from its inception, the series was initially marred by Writers Guild of America grievance claims from long-time franchise writers Fontana and David Gerrold, both of whom left the series under acrimonious circumstances; frequent turnover among the writing staff (24 staff writers left the show during its first three seasons, triple the average attrition rate for such series); and allegations that Roddenberry's attorney Leonard Maizlish had become the former's \"point man and proxy\", ghostwriting memos, sitting in on meetings, and contributing to scripts despite not being on staff. Writer Tracy Tormé described the first few seasons of \"The Next Generation\" under Roddenberry as an \"insane asylum\".\n\nIn 1990, Nicholas Meyer was brought in to direct the sixth film in the series: \"\". Roddenberry and he clashed creatively, as Roddenberry felt that having the \"Enterprise\" crew hold prejudices against the Klingons did not fit with his view of the universe. Meyer described a meeting with Roddenberry he later regretted, saying:His guys were lined up on one side of the room, and my guys were lined up on the other side of the room, and this was not a meeting in which I felt I'd behaved very well, very diplomatically, I came out of it feeling not very good, and I've not felt good about it ever since. He was not well, and maybe there were more tactful ways of dealing with it, because at the end of the day, I was going to go out and make the movie. I didn't have to take him on. Not my finest hour. Roddenberry watched \"The Undiscovered Country\" alongside the producers of the film, at a private screening two days before his death, and told them they had done a \"good job\".\n\nIn addition to his film and television work, Roddenberry wrote the novelization of \"Star Trek: The Motion Picture\", although it has been attributed to several other authors. It was the first in a series of hundreds of \"Star Trek\"-based novels to be published by the Pocket Books imprint of Simon & Schuster, whose parent company also owned Paramount Pictures Corporation. Previously, Roddenberry worked intermittently on a novel \"The God Thing\" that he had based upon his rejected 1975 screenplay for a proposed low-budget ($3 to $5 million) \"Star Trek\" film preceding the development of \"Phase II\" throughout 1976. Attempts to complete the project by Walter Koenig, Susan Sackett, Fred Bronson, and Michael Jan Friedman have proven to be unfeasible for a variety of legal and structural reasons.\n\nWhile at Los Angeles City College, Roddenberry began dating Eileen-Anita Rexroat. They became engaged before Roddenberry left Los Angeles during his military service, and married in June 1942 at the chapel at Kelly Field. They had two children together, Darleen Anita, and Dawn Allison. During his time in the LAPD, Roddenberry was known to have had affairs with secretarial staff. Before his work on \"Star Trek\", he began relationships with both Nichelle Nichols and Majel Barrett. Nichols only wrote about their relationship in her autobiography \"Beyond Uhura\" after Roddenberry's death. At the time, Roddenberry wanted to remain in an open relationship with both women, but Nichols, recognising Barrett's devotion to him, ended the affair as she did not want to be \"the other woman to the other woman\".\n\nBarrett and he had an apartment together by the opening weeks of \"Star Trek\". He had planned to divorce Eileen after the first season of the show, but when it was renewed, he delayed doing so, fearing that he would not have enough time to deal with both the divorce and \"Star Trek\". He moved out of the family home on August 9, 1968, two weeks after the marriage of his daughter Darleen. In 1969, while scouting locations in Japan for MGM for \"Pretty Maids all in a Row\", he proposed to Barrett by telephone. They were married in a Shinto ceremony, as Roddenberry had considered it \"sacrilegious\" to use an American minister in Japan. Roddenberry and Barrett had a son together, Eugene Jr., commonly referred to as Rod Roddenberry, in February 1974.\n\nRoddenberry was raised a Southern Baptist; however, as an adult, he rejected religion, and considered himself a humanist. He began questioning religion around the age of 14, and came to the conclusion that it was \"nonsense\". As a child, he served in the choir at his local church, but often substituted lyrics as he sang hymns. Early in his writing career, he received an award from the American Baptist Convention for \"skillfully writing Christian truth and the application of Christian principles into commercial, dramatic TV scripts\". For several years, he corresponded with John M. Gunn of the National Council of Churches regarding the application of Christian teachings in television series. However, Gunn stopped replying after Roddenberry wrote in a letter: \"But you must understand that I am a complete pagan, and consume enormous amounts of bread, having found the Word more spice than nourishment, so I am interested in a statement couched in dollars and cents of what this means to the Roddenberry treasury.\"\n\nRoddenberry said of Christianity, \"How can I take seriously a God-image that requires that I prostrate myself every seven days and praise it? That sounds to me like a very insecure personality.\" At one point, he worked a similar opinion, which was to have been stated by a Vulcan, into the plot for \"Star Trek: The God Thing\". Before his death, Roddenberry became close friends with philosopher Charles Musès, who said that Roddenberry's views were \"a far cry from atheism\". Roddenberry explained his position thusly: \"It's not true that I don't believe in God. I believe in a kind of God. It's just not other people's God. I reject religion. I accept the notion of God.\" He had an ongoing interest in other people's experiences with religion, and called Catholicism \"a very beautiful religion. An art form.\" However, he said that he dismissed all organized religions, saying that for the most part, they acted like a \"substitute brain... and a very malfunctioning one\". Roddenberry was also critical of how the public looked at certain religions, noting that when the King David Hotel bombing took place in 1946, the American public accepted it as the action of freedom fighters, whereas a car bombing by a Muslim in Beirut is condemned as a terrorist act. While he agreed that both parties were wrong in their use of violence, he said that the actions of both were undertaken because of their strong religious beliefs.\n\nAccording to Ronald D. Moore, Roddenberry \"felt very strongly that contemporary Earth religions would be gone by the 23rd century\". Brannon Braga said that Roddenberry made it known to the writers of \"Star Trek\" and \"Star Trek: The Next Generation\" that religion, superstition, and mystical thinking were not to be included. Even a mention of marriage in a script for an early episode of \"The Next Generation\" resulted in Roddenberry's chastising the writers. Nicholas Meyer said that \"Star Trek\" had evolved \"into sort of a secular parallel to the Catholic Mass\". Roddenberry compared the franchise to his own philosophy by saying: \"Understand that \"Star Trek\" is more than just my political philosophy, my racial philosophy, my overview on life and the human condition.\" He was awarded the 1991 Humanist Arts Award from the American Humanist Association.\n\nIn the late 1980s, Roddenberry was likely afflicted by the first manifestations of cerebral vascular disease and encephalopathy as a result of his longstanding recreational use of legal and illicit drugs, including alcohol, cannabis, diazepam, secobarbital, methylphenidate, Dexamyl, and cocaine (which he had used regularly since the production of \"Star Trek: The Motion Picture\"). Throughout much of his career, he had routinely used stimulants to work through the night on scripts, especially amphetamines. The effects of these substances were compounded by deleterious interactions with diabetes, high blood pressure, and antidepressant prescriptions.\n\nFollowing a stroke at a family reunion in Tallahassee, Florida, in September 1989, Roddenberry's health declined further, ultimately requiring him to use a wheelchair. Following another stroke in early October 1991, his right arm was paralyzed, causing him ongoing pain as the muscles began to atrophy. It also caused problems with the sight in his right eye and he found communicating in full sentences difficult. At 2:00 pm, on October 24, he attended an appointment with his doctor, Dr. Ronald Rich. He arrived in the building with his staff, and began to travel up to the ninth floor in the elevator. As they reached the fifth floor, he began struggling for breath, and was wheeled into the doctor's office, where he was reclined and a nurse administered oxygen. Barrett was sent for. Upon her arrival, she held Roddenberry while encouraging him to breathe. He had a cardiopulmonary arrest, and he died in the doctor's office shortly afterwards. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was attempted with no effect, and paramedics arrived to take him across the road to the Santa Monica Medical Center, where he was pronounced dead.\n\nThe funeral was arranged for November 1, with the public invited to the memorial service at the Hall of Liberty, within the Forest Lawn Memorial Park, in Hollywood Hills. It was a secular service; Roddenberry had been cremated before the event. More than 300 \"Star Trek\" fans attended, and stood in the balcony section of the hall, while the invited guests were on the floor level. Nichols sang twice during the ceremony, first \"Yesterday\" and then a song she wrote herself titled \"Gene\". Both songs had been requested by Barrett. Several people spoke at the memorial, including Ray Bradbury, Whoopi Goldberg, Christopher Knopf, E. Jack Newman, and Patrick Stewart. The ceremony was closed by two kilted pipers playing \"Amazing Grace\" as a recorded message by Roddenberry was broadcast. A four-plane flypast, in the missing man formation, followed some 30 minutes later. After his death, \"Star Trek: The Next Generation\" aired a two-part episode of season five, called \"\", which featured a dedication to Roddenberry.\n\nRoddenberry's will left the majority of his $30 million estate to Barrett, in a trust. He also left money to his children and his first wife Eileen. However, his daughter Dawn contested the will based upon the grounds that Barrett had undue influence on her father. In a hearing held in 1993, the Los Angeles Superior Court ruled that improprieties existed in the management of the trust and removed Barrett as executor. In another decision, the court found that Roddenberry had hidden assets from \"Star Trek\" in the Norway Corporation to keep funds away from his first wife, and ordered the payment of 50% of those assets to Eileen, as well as punitive damages. In 1996, the California Court of Appeals ruled that the original will, which stated that anyone who contested it would be disinherited, would stand. As a result, Dawn lost $500,000 from the estate, as well as a share of the trust upon Barrett's death. The appellate court also overturned the earlier decision to award Roddenberry's first wife, Eileen, 50% of his assets. The judge called that case one \"that should never have been\".\n\nIn 1992, some of Roddenberry's ashes were flown into space, and returned to Earth, on the Space Shuttle \"Columbia\" mission STS-52. On April 21, 1997, a Celestis spacecraft with 7 grams (a quarter of an ounce) of the cremated remains of Roddenberry, along with those of Timothy Leary, Gerard K. O'Neill and 21 other people, was launched into Earth orbit aboard a Pegasus XL rocket from a site near the Canary Islands. On May 20, 2002, the spacecraft's orbit deteriorated and it disintegrated in the atmosphere. Another flight to launch more of his ashes into deep space, along with those of Barrett, who died in 2008, was initially planned to take place in 2009. Unlike previous flights, the intention was that this flight would not return to burn up in the Earth's atmosphere. This flight was delayed and is now planned for launch in 2016. It will also include the ashes of James Doohan in addition to the Roddenberrys' and several others.\n\nIn 1985, Gene Roddenberry was the first television writer to receive a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. When the Sci-Fi Channel was launched, the first broadcast was a dedication to two \"science fiction pioneers\": Isaac Asimov and Roddenberry. The Roddenberry crater on Mars is named after him, as is the asteroid 4659 Roddenberry. Roddenberry and \"Star Trek\" have been cited as inspiration for other science fiction franchises, with George Lucas crediting the series for enabling \"Star Wars\" to be produced. J. Michael Straczynski, creator of the \"Babylon 5\" franchise, appreciated \"Star Trek\" amongst other science fiction series and \"what they had to say about who we are, and where we are going.\"\n\nDavid Alexander collaborated with Roddenberry on a biography over two decades. Titled \"Star Trek Creator\", it was published in 1995. Yvonne Fern's book, \"Gene Roddenberry: The Last Conversation\", detailed a series of conversations she had with Roddenberry over the last months of his life. In October 2002, a plaque was placed at Roddenberry's birthplace in El Paso, Texas. The Science Fiction Hall of Fame inducted Roddenberry in 2007, and the Television Academy Hall of Fame in January 2010.\n\n\"\" was already in development when Roddenberry died. Berman said that while he never discussed the ideas for the season, he was given a blessing by Roddenberry to pursue it. Berman later stated, \"I don't believe the 24th century is going to be like Gene Roddenberry believed it to be, that people will be free from poverty and greed. But if you're going to write and produce for \"Star Trek\", you've got to buy into that.\" In early 1996, Majel Barret-Roddenberry uncovered scripts for a series called \"Battleground Earth\". The project was sent to distributors by the Creative Artists Agency, and it was picked up by Tribune Entertainment, which set the budget at over $1 million per episode. The series was renamed \"\" before launch.\n\nTwo further series ideas were developed from Roddenberry's notes, \"Genesis\" and \"Andromeda\". After an initial order for two seasons, 110 episodes of \"Andromeda\" were aired over five seasons. Tribune also worked on another Roddenberry series. Titled \"Starship\"; they aimed to launch it via the network route rather than into syndication. Rod Roddenberry, president of Roddenberry Productions, announced in 2010, at his father's posthumous induction into the Academy of Television Arts and Sciences Hall of Fame, that he was aiming to take \"The Questor Tapes\" to television. Rod was developing the series alongside Imagine Television. Rod would go on to create the two-hour television movie \"Trek Nation\" regarding the impact of his father's work.\n\nThe majority of the awards and nominations received by Roddenberry throughout his career were related to \"Star Trek\". He was credited for \"Star Trek\" during the nominations for two Emmy Awards, and won two Hugo Awards. One Hugo was a special award for the series, while another was for \"The Menagerie\", the episode which used footage from the original unaired pilot for \"Star Trek\", \"The Cage\". In addition, he was awarded the Brotherhood Award by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People for his work in the advancement of African American characters on television. Following the end of \"Star Trek\", he was nominated for Hugo Awards for \"Genesis II\" and \"The Questor Tapes\". Following his death in 1991, he was posthumously awarded the Robert A. Heinlein Memorial Award by the National Space Society and the The George Pal Memorial Award at the Saturn Awards, as well as the Exceptional Public Service Medal by NASA.\n\n", "id": "13148", "title": "Gene Roddenberry"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13149", "text": "Galaxy Quest\n\nGalaxy Quest is a 1999 American comedy science fiction film directed by Dean Parisot and written by David Howard and Robert Gordon. Mark Johnson and Charles Newirth produced the film for DreamWorks Pictures.\n\nParodying television series such as \"\" and its fandom, the film stars Tim Allen, Sigourney Weaver, Alan Rickman, Tony Shalhoub, Sam Rockwell, and Daryl Mitchell as the cast of a defunct television series called \"Galaxy Quest\", in which the crew of a spaceship embarked on intergalactic adventures. Enrico Colantoni stars as the leader of an alien race who ask the actors for help, believing the show's adventures were real. The film's supporting cast features Robin Sachs as the warlord Sarris and Patrick Breen as another alien. Justin Long makes his feature film debut as an obsessed fan of the television show.\n\nThe film received critical praise and reached cult status through the years, becoming popular with \"Star Trek\" fans, staff, and cast members for its affectionate parody. It won the prestigious Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation, the Nebula Award for Best Script, 26th Hochi Film Award for Best International Picture and was also nominated for ten Saturn Awards including Best Science Fiction Film, Best Director for Parisot, Best Actress for Weaver and Best Supporting Actor for Rickman, winning Best Actor for Allen. The film was included in \"Reader's Digest\"s list of The Top 100+ Funniest Movies of All Time.\n\nThe former cast of the once-popular television space-adventure series \"Galaxy Quest\" spend most of their days attending fan conventions and promotional stunts. Though Jason Nesmith (Allen), who played the commander of the NSEA \"Protector\", thrives with the attention, the other cast members—Alexander Dane (Rickman) as the ship's alien science officer, Fred Kwan (Shalhoub) as the chief engineer, Gwen DeMarco (Weaver) as the computer officer, and Tommy Webber (Mitchell) as a precocious child pilot—all resent these events.\n\nDuring one event, Nesmith is approached by Mathesar (Colantoni) and others calling themselves \"Thermians\" and request his assistance, which he agrees to, thinking this is a planned and paying fan event. Later at that same convention, Nesmith becomes despondent after overhearing attendees speaking of him as a laughing stock by fans and his fellow actors, and he loses his temper with an avid fan, Brandon (Long). After Nesmith spends the night drinking heavily, the Thermians arrive to pick up a hungover Nesmith in the limo he had requested. Unaware that they are truly octopoidal aliens, using technology to appear human, the barely conscious Nesmith is oblivious to his limo being beamed aboard the Thermian's spaceship. Aboard their ship in deep space, Nesmith goes through the motions of commanding the ship and asks to be returned home. When they send him back to Earth via a transporter, Nesmith realizes that it is all real. He races to meet his cast, accidentally bumping into Brandon and misplacing a Thermian communicator Mathasar gave him with Brandon's fan-made replica. Nesmith eagerly relates his experience to the crew, who think he is drunk again. When another Thermian appears and request the entire crew's help, Nesmith manages to convince them, along with their handler Guy Fleegman (Rockwell), an actor who played a unnamed security officer on one episode before being killed off, to come along. They are all transported to a perfect reproduction of the NSEA \"Protector\" in deep space, and are shocked by the reality of the situation.\n\nMathesar begs the crew to command the \"Protector\", as Nesmith's previous actions (namely, blowing up the opposing ship) have enraged Sarris (Sachs), a reptilian humanoid that seeks to wipe out the Thermians. While they were able to recreate the ship from the broadcast episodes, the Thermians have no idea how to pilot it. The crew hesitantly take the controls, and despite their ineptitude, the Thermians cheer them on. After the second encounter with Sarris' ship, they barely evade his attack by flying through a minefield, severely damaging the ship. The humans take a shuttle to a nearby planet to find a replacement beryllium sphere as a new power source. They manage to secure the sphere after a run-in with the hostile alien species on the planet. Once back aboard the \"Protector\", they find that Sarris and his soldiers have captured the ship.\n\nSarris interrogates the humans, discovering they are only actors, and recognizes that the Thermians have no concept of fiction, believing the show to have been real. Sarris sets the \"Protector\" to self-destruct and departs, leaving a few sacrificial soldiers to guard the humans. Nesmith and Dane use a gambit from the show to engineer their escape, and then Nesmith orders his fellow cast members to help rescue the other Thermians, finish repairs to the \"Protector\", and prepare to engage Sarris in combat. Nesmith and DeMarco then set off into the bowels of the ship to stop the self-destruct sequence, using help from Brandon and his group of friends via the swapped communication device. Along the way, they encounter Omega 13, a plot device introduced in the final episode but never used; Brandon notes it could either destroy all matter in the universe or rewind time by 13 seconds, \"enough time to undo one mistake\".\n\nHaving finally accepted their roles on the ship and gained confidence in themselves, Nesmith and his crew use the minefield as a weapon against Sarris' ship, destroying it. They prepare to head to Earth when Sarris, who has transported over at the last moment, starts killing the crew. A desperate Nesmith activates the Omega 13, which reverses time far enough for him to knock out Sarris. They near a wormhole to return the humans home via the command module, and Nesmith assures Mathesar he has the ability to command the \"Protector\" along with the other Thermians. The humans, along with Laliari (Pyle), a Thermian that has fallen in love with Kwan, return home. Guided in by fireworks set by Brandon and his friends, the command module makes a crash landing near a fan convention and comes to a stop after bursting through one wall, which the audience takes as part of the show. As the crew exits the module, Sarris wakes up and tries to fire on them, but Nesmith reacts faster, and disintegrates Sarris with a phaser-like weapon. The crowd erupts into cheers. Some time later, \"Galaxy Quest\" is revived as a new series, starring the same cast along with Fleegman and Laliari.\n\nVoice actor Kevin McDonald makes an appearance as an announcer at a fan convention.\n\nThe original script by David Howard was titled \"Captain Starshine\" and written on spec. Producer Mark Johnson, who had a first look deal with DreamWorks, did not like it, but was still fascinated with its concept featuring space aliens who misconstrue old episodes of a TV show. Johnson purchased the script and had Bob Gordon rewrite it into \"Galaxy Quest\". Gordon, a fan of \"Star Trek\", was hesitant, believing \"Galaxy Quest\" \"could be a great idea or it could be a terrible idea\" and initially turned it down. He submitted his first draft to DreamWorks in 1998, which was immediately greenlit. Gordon wanted his \"Home Fries\" director Dean Parisot to direct, but DreamWorks favored Harold Ramis for his experience. Ramis was hired in November 1998, but departed in February 1999 because of casting difficulties. He wanted Alec Baldwin for the lead role, who turned it down. Steve Martin and Kevin Kline were considered, though Kline turned it down for family reasons. Ramis did not agree with the casting of Tim Allen as Jason Nesmith, and Parisot took over as director within three weeks. After seeing the film, Ramis said he was ultimately impressed with Allen's performance.\n\nTony Shalhoub originally auditioned for Guy Fleegman, but Sam Rockwell won the part, and Shalhoub was cast as Fred Kwan instead. Rockwell almost backed out after winning the lead role in an independent film, but Kevin Spacey convinced him otherwise. Justin Long said he was nervous auditioning as an unknown actor at the time, competing against Kieran Culkin, Eddie Kaye Thomas, and Tom Everett Scott for the part of Brandon. Paul Rudd auditioned for a role, while David Alan Grier was the second choice for Tommy Webber, and Jennifer Coolidge for Laliari.\n\nDavid Newman composed the music score. Non-humanoid creatures for the film were created by Stan Winston Studio, from designs by Crash McCreery, Chris Swift, Brom, Bernie Wrightson, and Simon Bisley.\n\nScenes on the barren planet where they stopped to get a new Beryllium Sphere and Captain Nesmith battled a rock monster, were filmed at Goblin Valley State Park in Utah. At the time, the access to Goblin Valley State Park was partly by dirt road; the fees paid by the production company were used to upgrade the entire access road to asphalt pavement.\n\nThe film originally received an \"R\" rating, according to \"Galaxy Quest\" producer Lindsey Collins and Sigourney Weaver, before being re-cut. Shalhoub did not remember any darker version of the film. There were numerous edits in the film that show some lines were changed in post-production. In one scene, Gwen DeMarco's line \"Well, screw that!\" is clearly dubbed over \"Well, fuck that!\" According to the director, Dean Parisot, that line got a huge laugh. There is more profanity found in the shooting script.\n\nOn Rotten Tomatoes, it received an approval rating of 90% based on 115 reviews and an average rating of 7.2/10. The site's critical consensus reads, \"Intelligent and humorous satire with an excellent cast – no previous Trekkie knowledge needed to enjoy this one.\" On Metacritic, the film has a score of 70 out of 100, based on 28 critics, indicating \"generally favorable reviews\".\n\n\"The New York Times\"s Lawrence Van Gelder called it \"an amiable comedy that simultaneously manages to spoof these popular futuristic space adventures and replicate the very elements that have made them so durable\". Roger Ebert praised the ability of the film to spoof the \"illogic of the TV show\". \"The Village Voice\" offered a lukewarm review, noting that \"the many eight- to 11-year-olds in the audience seemed completely enthralled\".\n\nThe film also proved quite popular with \"Star Trek\" fans. At the 2013 Star Trek Convention in Las Vegas, \"Galaxy Quest\" received enough support in a \"Star Trek\" Film Ranking, and was included with the twelve Star Trek films that had been released at the time on the voting ballot. The fans at the convention ranked it the seventh best \"Star Trek\" film.\n\nThe film was financially successful. It earned US$7,012,630 in its opening weekend, and its total U.S. domestic tally stands at US$71,583,916; in total it has grossed US$90,683,916 worldwide.\n\n\"Galaxy Quest\" is an acknowledged homage to \"Star Trek\"; therefore a variety of elements in the former correspond to those of the latter. The television program within the film, \"Galaxy Quest\", is set around the starship NSEA \"Protector\", an instrument of the National Space Exploration Administration, which are parodies of the USS \"Enterprise\" (NCC-1701) and Starfleet respectively. The prefix of the \"Protector\"’s registration number NTE-3120 ostensibly alludes to some sort of similar space federation, but in reality stands for \"Not The Enterprise\", according to visual effects co-supervisor Bill George in a 2000 interview with \"Cinefex\" magazine.\n\nThis homage also extended to the original marketing of the movie, including a promotional website intentionally designed to look like a poorly constructed fan website, with \"screen captures\" and poor HTML coding. The homage even parodied the effect that \"Star Trek\" had on the social lives of its cast members, such as how Alex Dane (played by Alan Rickman) has been typecast after his success in the \"Galaxy Quest\" television show; this reflects the lamentations of Leonard Nimoy, who had been typecast after his performance as Spock.\n\nSeveral actors who have had roles on various \"Star Trek\" television series and films have commented on \"Galaxy Quest\" in light of their own experiences with the franchise and its fandom.\n\n\nTalks of a sequel have been going on since the film's release in 1999, but only began gaining traction in 2014 when Allen mentioned that there was a script. Stars Weaver and Rockwell mentioned they were interested in returning. However, Colantoni has stated that he would prefer for there not to be a sequel, lest it tarnish the characters from the first film. He said, \"to make something up, just because we love those characters, and turn it into a sequel — then it becomes the awful sequel.\"\n\nIn April 2015, Paramount Television, along with the movie's co-writer Gordon, director Parisot, and executive producers Johnson and Bernstein, announced they were looking to develop a television series based on \"Galaxy Quest\". The move was considered in a similar vein as Paramount's revivals of \"Minority Report\" and \"School of Rock\" as television series. In August 2015, it was announced that Amazon Studios would be developing it.\n\nIn January 2016, after the unexpected death of Alan Rickman from pancreatic cancer, Tim Allen commented in the \"Hollywood Reporter\" about the franchise's chance of a revival:\n\nSpeaking to the Nerdist podcast in April 2016, Sam Rockwell stated that the cast had been about ready to sign on for a follow up with Amazon. However, Rickman's death as well as Allen's television schedule proved to be obstacles, and they ultimately did not. \n\n\n", "id": "13149", "title": "Galaxy Quest"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13151", "text": "Gilgamesh\n\nGilgamesh (; , \"Gilgameš,\" originally Bilgamesh ) is the main character in the \"Epic of Gilgamesh\", an Akkadian poem that is considered the first great work of literature, and in earlier Sumerian poems. In the epic, Gilgamesh is a demigod of superhuman strength who builds the city walls of Uruk to defend his people and after the death of his friend Enkidu travels to meet the sage Utnapishtim, who survived the Great Flood. His name means something to the effect of \"The Ancestor is a Young-man\" (J.L. Hayes \"A Manual of Sumerian Grammar and Texts\"), from Bil.ga = Ancestor, Elder (J.Halloran Sum.Lexicon p. 33) and Mes/Mesh3 = Young-Man (Halloran Sum.Lexicon p. 174). (See also \"The Electronic Pennsylvania Sumerian Dictionary\")\n\nGilgamesh is generally seen by scholars as a historical figure, since inscriptions have been found which confirm the existence of other figures associated with him in the epic. If Gilgamesh existed, he probably was a king who reigned sometime between 2800 and 2500 BC. The Sumerian King List claims that Gilgamesh ruled the city of Uruk for 126 years. According to the Tummal Inscription, Gilgamesh and his son Urlugal rebuilt the sanctuary of the goddess Ninlil in Tummal, a sacred quarter in her city of Nippur.\n\nThe story was discovered in the nineteenth century, and allows us to take a glimpse into the cultures and people of the region. The earliest cuneiform references to Gilgamesh on clay tablets relate (according to the Encyclopædia Britannica) to the discovery of the library of Ashurbanipal\nThe Gilgamesh story was written over a millennium by no specific author but was a culmination of many different people adding their own part to the epic.\nThis epic poetry is a cycle of Sumerian recordings, probably of an earlier oral tradition in which he appears under the name \"Bilgamesh\" (spelled in Sumerian cuneiform as BIL4.GA.MESH3 or BIL3.GA.MESH). These poems include many of the stories that would make up the later, more famous \"Epic of Gilgamesh\", written in the Akkadian language. The latest and most comprehensive telling of the Gilgamesh legend was the twelve-tablet Standard Babylonian Version, compiled 1200 BC by the exorcist-priest (\"mašmaššu\") Sîn-lēqi-unninni.\n\nFragments of an epic text found in Me-Turan (modern Tell Haddad) relate that at the end of his life Gilgamesh was buried under the river bed. The people of Uruk diverted the flow of the Euphrates passing Uruk for the purpose of burying the dead king within the river bed. In April 2003, a German expedition claimed to have discovered his last resting place.\n\nSome of the Sumerian texts spell his name as \"Bilgamesh\". Initial difficulties in reading cuneiform resulted in Gilgamesh's name being initially given as \"Izdubar\" when parts of the epic were first published in English in 1872.\n\nAlthough Gilgamesh was originally considered by scholars to be a semidivine hero, he is now generally regarded as a historical king. In most cuneiform texts, the name of Gilgamesh is preceded with the star-shaped \"dingir\" determinative ideogram for divine beings, but there is no evidence for a contemporary cult, and the Sumerian Gilgamesh myths suggest that deification was a later development (unlike the case of the Akkadian god-kings). The earliest datable cuneiform tablet bears the name of Enmebaragesi of Kish; he and his son Aga of Kish are associated with Gilgamesh in the epic, as well as appearing in the kinglist and Tummal Chronicle. If Gilgamesh was a historical king, he probably reigned in about the 26th century BC.\n\nOver the centuries there may have been a gradual accretion of stories about Gilgamesh, some possibly derived from the real lives of other historical figures, in particular Gudea, the Second Dynasty ruler of Lagash (2144–2124 BC).\n\nIn the Qumran scroll known as \"Book of Giants\" (c. 100 BC) the names of Gilgamesh and Humbaba appear as two of the antediluvian giants, rendered (in consonantal form) as \"glgmš\" and \"ḩwbbyš\". This same text was later used in the Middle East by the Manichaean sects, and the Arabic form \"Gilgamish\"/\"Jiljamish\" survives as the name of a demon according to the Egyptian cleric Al-Suyuti (c. 1500).\n\nThe name Gilgamesh appears once in Greek, as \"Gilgamos\" (Γίλγαμος), in Aelian's \"De Natura Animalium\" (\"On the Nature of Animals\") 12.21 (written c. AD 200). In Aelian's story, the King of Babylon, Seuechorus or Euechorus, determined by oracle that his grandson Gilgamos would kill him, so he threw him out of a high tower. An eagle broke his fall, and the infant was found and raised by a gardener, eventually becoming king.\n\nTheodore Bar Konai (c. AD 600), writing in Syriac, also mentions a king \"Gligmos\", \"Gmigmos\" or \"Gamigos\" as last of a line of twelve kings who were contemporaneous with the patriarchs from Peleg to Abraham; this occurrence is also considered a vestige of Gilgamesh's former memory.\n\n\n", "id": "13151", "title": "Gilgamesh"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13152", "text": "Gluten\n\nGluten (from Latin \"gluten\", \"glue\") is a mixture of proteins found in wheat and related grains, including barley, rye, oat (depending on cultivar and processing), and all their species and hybrids (such as spelt, kamut, and triticale). Gluten is appreciated for its viscoelastic properties. It gives elasticity to dough, helping it rise and keep its shape and often gives the final product a chewy texture.\n\nGluten is a composite of storage proteins termed prolamins. It is conjoined with starch in the endosperm of various grass-related grains. Wheat prolamins are called gliadins and glutenins, barley prolamins are hordeins, rye prolamins are secalins and oats prolamins are avenins. Oat avenin toxicity in people with gluten-related disorders depends on the oat cultivar consumed because the immunoreactivities of toxic prolamins are different among oat varieties. Also, many oat products are cross-contaminated with gluten-containing cereals.\n\nThe fruit of most flowering plants have endosperms with stored protein to nourish embryonic plants during germination. True gluten is limited to certain members of the grass family. The stored proteins of maize and rice are sometimes called glutens, but their proteins differ from true gluten.\n\nGluten is a protein complex that accounts for 75 to 85% of the total protein in bread wheat. Gluten is prepared from flour by kneading the flour under water, agglomerating the gluten into an elastic network, a dough, and then washing out the starch. Starch granules disperse in cold/low-temperature water, and the dispersed starch is sedimented and dried. If a saline solution is used instead of water, a purer protein is obtained, with certain harmless impurities departing to the solution with the starch. Where starch is the prime product, cold water is the favored solvent because the impurities depart from the gluten.\n\nIn home or restaurant cooking, a ball of wheat flour dough is kneaded under water until the starch disperses out. In industrial production, a slurry of wheat flour is kneaded vigorously by machinery until the gluten agglomerates into a mass. This mass is collected by centrifugation, then transported through several stages integrated in a continuous process. About 65% of the water in the wet gluten is removed by means of a screw press; the remainder is sprayed through an atomizer nozzle into a drying chamber, where it remains at an elevated temperature a short time to evaporate the water without denaturing the gluten. The process yields a flour-like powder with a 7% moisture content, which is air cooled and pneumatically transported to a receiving vessel. In the final step, the processed gluten is sifted and milled to produce a uniform product.\n\nGluten forms when glutenin molecules cross-link to form a submicroscopic network attached to gliadin, which contributes viscosity (thickness) and extensibility to the mix. If this dough is leavened with yeast, fermentation produces carbon dioxide bubbles, which, trapped by the gluten network, cause the dough to rise. Baking coagulates the gluten, which, along with starch, stabilizes the shape of the final product. Gluten content has been implicated as a factor in the staling of bread, possibly because it binds water through hydration.\n\nThe development of gluten (i.e., enhancing its elasticity) affects the texture of the baked goods. Gluten's attainable elasticity is proportional to its content of glutenins with low molecular weights as this portion contains the preponderance of the sulfur atoms responsible for the cross-linking in the network.\nMore refining (of the gluten) leads to chewier products such as pizza and bagels, while less refining yields tender baked goods such as pastry products.\n\nGenerally, bread flours are high in gluten (hard wheat); pastry flours have a lower gluten content. Kneading promotes the formation of gluten strands and cross-links, creating baked products that are chewier (in contrast to crumbly). The \"chewiness\" increases as the dough is kneaded for longer times. An increased moisture content in the dough enhances gluten development, and very wet doughs left to rise for a long time require no kneading (see no-knead bread). Shortening inhibits formation of cross-links and is used, along with diminished water and less kneading, when a tender and flaky product, such as a pie crust, is desired.\n\nThe strength and elasticity of gluten in flour is measured in the baking industry using a farinograph. This gives the baker a measurement of quality for different varieties of flours in developing recipes for various baked goods.\n\nGluten, when dried and milled to a powder and added to ordinary flour dough, improves a dough's ability to rise and increases the bread's structural stability and chewiness. Gluten-added dough must be worked vigorously to induce it to rise to its full capacity; an automatic bread machine or food processor may be required for high-gluten kneading. Generally, higher gluten levels are associated with higher amounts of overall protein.\n\nGluten, especially wheat gluten, is often the basis for imitation meats resembling beef, chicken, duck (see mock duck), fish, and pork. When cooked in broth, gluten absorbs some of the surrounding liquid (including the flavor) and becomes firm to the bite.\n\nGluten is often present in beer and soy sauce, and can be used as a stabilizing agent in more unexpected food products, such as ice cream and ketchup. Foods of this kind may raise a problem for a small number of consumers because the hidden gluten constitutes a hazard for people with celiac disease.\n\nGluten is also used in cosmetics, hair products, and other dermatological preparations.\n\nThe protein content of some pet foods may also be enhanced by adding gluten.\n\nGluten-related disorders is the umbrella term for all diseases triggered by gluten, which include celiac disease (CD), non-celiac gluten sensitivity (NCGS), wheat allergy, gluten ataxia, and dermatitis herpetiformis (DH). Currently, their incidence is increasing in most geographic areas of the world. It can be explained possibly by the growing westernization of diet, increasing use of wheat-based foods included in the Mediterranean diet, the progressive replacement of rice by wheat in many countries in Asia, the Middle East, and North Africa, the development in recent years of new types of wheat with a higher amount of cytotoxic gluten peptides, and the higher content of gluten in bread and bakery products, due to the reduction of dough fermentation time.\n\nCeliac disease (CD) is a chronic, immune-mediated mainly intestinal process, caused by the ingestion of wheat, barley, rye, and derivatives, that appears in genetically predisposed people of all ages. CD is not only a gastrointestinal disease, because it may involve several organs and cause an extensive variety of non-gastrointestinal symptoms, and most importantly, it may often be completely asymptomatic. Added difficulties for diagnosis are the fact that serological markers (anti-tissue transglutaminase [TG2]) are not always present and many people may have minor mucosal lesions, without atrophy of the intestinal villi.\n\nCD affects approximately 1–2% of the general population, but most cases remain unrecognized, undiagnosed and untreated, and at risk for serious long-term health complications. People may suffer severe disease symptoms and be subjected to extensive investigations for many years, before a proper diagnosis is achieved. Untreated CD may cause malabsorption, reduced quality of life, iron deficiency, osteoporosis, an increased risk of intestinal lymphomas, and greater mortality. CD is associated with some other autoimmune diseases, such as diabetes mellitus type 1, thyroiditis, gluten ataxia, psoriasis, vitiligo, autoimmune hepatitis, dermatitis herpetiformis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, and more.\n\nCD with \"classic symptoms\", which include gastrointestinal manifestations such as chronic diarrhea and abdominal distention, malabsorption, loss of appetite, and impaired growth, is currently the least common presentation form of the disease and affects predominantly small children generally younger than two years of age.\n\nCD with \"non-classic symptoms\" is the most common clinical type and occurs in older children (over 2 years old), adolescents, and adults. It is characterized by milder or even absent gastrointestinal symptoms and a wide spectrum of non-intestinal manifestations that can involve any organ of the body, and very frequently may be completely asymptomatic both in children (at least in 43% of the cases) and adults.\n\nNon-celiac gluten sensitivity (NCGS) is described as a condition of multiple symptoms that improves when switching to a gluten-free diet, after celiac disease and wheat allergy are excluded. Recognized since 2010, it is included among gluten-related disorders, but its pathogenesis is not yet well understood. NCGS is the most common syndrome of gluten intolerance, with a prevalence estimated to be 6-10%.\n\nPeople with NCGS may develop gastrointestinal symptoms, which resemble those of irritable bowel syndrome or wheat allergy, and/or a wide variety of non-gastrointestinal symptoms, such as headache, chronic fatigue, fibromyalgia, atopic diseases, allergies, neurological diseases, or psychiatric disorders, among others.\n\nBesides gluten, additional components present in wheat, rye, barley, and their derivatives, including other proteins and short-chain carbohydrates called FODMAPs, may cause NCGS symptoms. The effects of FODMAPs are only limited to gastrointestinal discomfort.\n\nPeople can also experience adverse effects of wheat as result of a wheat allergy. As with most allergies, a wheat allergy causes the immune system to abnormally respond to a component of wheat that it treats as a threatening foreign body. This immune response is often time-limited and does not cause lasting harm to body tissues. Wheat allergy and celiac disease are different disorders. Gastrointestinal symptoms of wheat allergy are similar to those of celiac disease and non-celiac gluten sensitivity, but there is a different interval between exposure to wheat and onset of symptoms. An allergic reaction to wheat has a fast onset (from minutes to hours) after the consumption of food containing wheat and could include anaphylaxis.\n\nThe \"Codex Alimentarius\" international standards for food labelling has a standard relating to the labelling of products as \"gluten-free\". It only applies to foods that would normally contain gluten.\n\nBy law in Brazil, all food products must display labels clearly indicating whether or not they contain gluten.\n\nThe Canadian Celiac Association estimates that one in 133 Canadians experiences adverse symptoms from gluten in celiac disease. Labels for all food products sold in Canada must clearly identify the presence of gluten if it is present at a level greater than 20 parts per million.\n\nIn the United Kingdom, all prepackaged foods and non-prepacked foods from a restaurant, take-out food wrapped just before sale, or unpackaged food served in institutions must be identified if gluten-free. \"Gluten-free\" is defined as 20 parts per million of gluten or less and \"very low gluten\" is 100 parts per million of gluten or less; only foods with cereal ingredients processed to remove gluten can claim \"very low gluten\" on labels,\n\nIn the United States, gluten is not listed on labels unless added as a stand-alone ingredient. Wheat or other allergens are listed after the ingredient line. The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has historically classified gluten as \"generally recognized as safe\" (GRAS). In August 2013, FDA issued a final rule, effective August 2014, that defined the term \"gluten-free\" for voluntary use in the labeling of foods as meaning that the amount of gluten contained in the food is below 20 parts per million.\n\n\n", "id": "13152", "title": "Gluten"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13154", "text": "Glen or Glenda\n\nGlen or Glenda is a 1953 drama film written, directed by, and starring Ed Wood, and featuring Bela Lugosi and Wood's then-girlfriend Dolores Fuller. The title was originally I Changed My Sex! and is often given as Glen or Glenda? but the question mark is not present in the film itself.\n\nThe film is a docudrama about cross-dressing and transsexuality, and is semi-autobiographical in nature. Wood himself was a cross-dresser, and the film is a plea for tolerance. It is widely considered one of the worst films ever. However, it has become a cult film due to its low-budget production values and idiosyncratic style.\n\nThe film begins with a narrator, called The Scientist (Bela Lugosi), making cryptic comments about humanity. He first comments that humanity's constant search for the unknown, results in startling things coming to light. But most of these \"new\" discoveries are actually quite old, to which he refers to as \"the signs of the ages\". Later, the scene turns to the streets of a city, with the narrator commenting that each human has his/her own thoughts, ideas, and personality. He makes further comments on human life, while sounds accompany some comments. The cries of a newborn baby are followed by the sirens of an ambulance. One is a sign that a new life has begun, the other that a life has ended.\nThis last comment starts the narrative of the film. The life which has ended is that of a transvestite named Patrick/Patricia, who has committed suicide. A scene opens with his/her corpse in a small room. Within the room is an unidentified man who opens the door to a physician, a photographer, and the police. A suicide note explains the reasons behind the suicide. Patrick/Patricia had been arrested four times for cross-dressing in public, and had spent time in prison. Since he/she would continue wearing women's clothing, subsequent arrests and imprisonment were only a matter of time. So he/she ended his/her own life and wishes to be buried with his/her women's clothing. \"\"Let my body rest in death forever, in the things I cannot wear in life.\"\"\nInspector Warren is puzzled and wants to know more about cross-dressing. So he seeks the office of Dr. Alton, who narrates for him the story of Glen/Glenda. Glen is shown studying women's clothes in a shop window. Dr. Alton points out that men's clothes are dull and restrictive, whereas women can adorn themselves with attractive and comfortable clothing.\n\nThe narrative explains that Glen is a transvestite, but not a homosexual. He hides his cross-dressing from his fiancée, Barbara, fearing that she will reject him.\n\nAlton narrates that Glen is torn between the idea of being honest with Barbara before their wedding, or waiting until after. The narrative shifts briefly from Glen's story to how society reacts to sex change operations. A conversation between two \"average joes\", concludes that society should be more \"lenient\" when it comes to people with tranvestite tendencies. The story returns to Glen, who confides in a transvestite friend of his, John, whose wife left him after catching him wearing her clothes.\n\nLater, a scene opens with Glenda walking the city streets at night. He/she returns home in obvious anguish, when the sound of thunder causes him/her to collapse to the floor. The Scientist cryptically comments \"\"Beware! Beware! Beware of the big, green dragon that sits on your doorstep! He eats little boys, puppy dog tails, and big, fat snails! Take care! Beware!\"\" This serves as the introduction to an extended dream sequence. The dream opens with Barbara anguished at seeing Glenda. Then Barbara is depicted trapped under a tree, while the room around is in a chaotic state. Glenda fails to lift the tree and rescue Barbara. Glenda is replaced by Glen, who completes the task with ease. The dream then depicts Glen and Barbara getting married. The priest seems normal but the best man is a stereotypical devil, smiling ominously, suggesting that this marriage is damned. The dream shifts to the Scientist, who seems to speak to the unseen dragon, asking it what it eats. The voice of a little girl provides the answers in an apparently mocking tone.\n\nThe dreams continues with a strange series of vignettes. A woman is whipped by a shirtless man in a BDSM-themed vignette. Several women \"flirt and partially disrobe\" for an unseen audience. A woman tears apart her dress in a dramatic manner, then starts a coy striptease. The whipped woman from an earlier vignette appears alone in an autoerotic session. Her pleasure is interrupted by another woman who forcibly binds and gags her. Another woman has a similar autoerotic session and then falls asleep. As she sleeps, a predatory male approaches and rapes her, with the victim seeming partially willing by the end of it. Throughout these vignettes, the faces of Glen and the Scientist appear. They seem to be silently reacting to the various images.\n\nThe dream returns to Glen, who is haunted by sounds of mocking voices and howling winds. He is soon confronted by two spectral figures. A blackboard appears, with messages recording what the Scientist or the mocking voices said in previous scenes. A large number of spectres appear, all gazing at him with disapproval, as if serving as the jury of public opinion on his perceived deviance. The mocking voices return. The Devil and the various spectres menacingly approach Glen. Then the Devil departs, Glen turns into Glenda, and the spectres retreat. A victorious Glenda sees Barbara and approaches her, but she turns into a mocking Devil. Barbara starts appearing and disappearing, always evading Glenda's embrace. Then she starts \nmocking her lover. The Devil and spectres also shift to mocking Glenda. The dream sequence ends.\n\nGlen/Glenda wakes and stares at his/her mirror reflection. He/she decides to tell Barbara the truth. She initially reacts with distress, but ultimately decides to stay with him. She offers him/her an angora sweater as a sign of acceptance. The scene effectively concludes their story.\n\nBack in Dr. Alton's office, he starts another narrative. This one concerns another tranvestite, called Alan/Ann. He was born a boy, but his mother wanted a girl and raised him as such. His/Her father did not care either way. He/She was an outsider as a schoolboy, trying to be one of the girls and consequently rejected by schoolmates of both sexes. As a teenager, he/she self-identified as a woman. He/she was conscripted in World War II, maintaining a secret life throughout his/her military service. He/she first heard of sex change operations during the War while recovering from combat wounds in a hospital. He/she eventually did have a sex change operation, enduring the associated pains to fulfill his/her dreams. The World War II veteran becomes a \"lovely young lady\". Following a brief epilogue, the film ends.\n\n\nShot in four days, the film was loosely inspired by the sex reassignment surgery of Christine Jorgensen, which made national headlines in the U.S. in 1952. George Weiss, a Hollywood producer of low-budget films, commissioned a movie to exploit it. Originally Weiss made Jorgensen several offers to appear in the film, but these were turned down. Wood convinced Weiss that his own transvestism made him the perfect director despite his modest resume. Wood was given the job, but instead made a movie about transvestism.\n\nWood persuaded Lugosi, at the time poor and drug-addicted, to appear in the movie. Lugosi's scenes were shot at the Jack Miles Studios in Los Angeles. He was reportedly paid $5000 for the role, although some stories state the actual amount was only $1000. Lugosi is credited as \"The Scientist\", a character whose purpose is unclear. He acts as a sort of narrator but gives no narration relevant to the plot; that job is reserved for the film's primary narrator, Timothy Farrell.\n\nThis was the only film Wood directed but did not also produce. Wood himself played the eponymous character, but under the pseudonym \"Daniel Davis\". His girlfriend, Dolores Fuller, played Glen's girlfriend. Wood later returned to \"Glen or Glenda\" in his pulp novel \"Killer in Drag\" (1963). The plot features a transvestite called Glen whose alter-ego is called Glenda. He is executed in the sequel \"Death of a Transvestite\" (1967) after a struggle for the right to go to the electric chair dressed as Glenda.\n\nThe erotic-themed vignettes were not created by Wood. They were reportedly added by producer George Weiss. He needed extra scenes to add to what he felt was an overtly -short film. While not organic parts of the narrative, they seem to tell their own tales of gender dynamics and so fit in the general themes of the film. The whipping scene suggests a Master/slave relationship. That the man is dominant and the woman submissive, seems to reflect male chauvinism. The flirtatious and striptease-themed vignettes were typical of 1950s exploitation films and grindhouse films. So was the rape scene.\n\nThe film has deleted scenes. In the theatrical trailer, included in laserdisc and DVD editions, the scene in which Fuller hands over her angora sweater, is a different take than the one in the release version — in the trailer, she tosses it to Wood in a huff, while the release version shows her handing it over more acceptingly. There is also a shot of Wood in drag, mouthing the word \"Cut!\"\n\nThe second part of the film, titled \"Alan or Anne\", is much shorter, told largely through stock footage, and was made to meet the distributor's demand for a sex change film. Alan is a pseudo-hermaphrodite who fights in World War II wearing women's underwear. After his return, Alan undergoes surgery to become a woman.\n\nDomestically, the film was limited in release, having been pre-sold to some theaters (under alternative titles such including \"I Led Two Lives\", \"He or She?\" and \"I Changed My Sex\"). Internationally, the film was also limited, and in France and Belgium, the title was translated as \"Louis ou Louise\" and in Argentina as \"Yo Cambié Mi Sexo\"; the film had a brief screening in the Republic of China.\n\nAccording to Tim Dirks, the film was one of a wave of \"cheap teen movies\" released for the drive-in market. They consisted of \"exploitative, cheap fare created especially for them [teens] in a newly-established teen/drive-in genre.\"\n\nIn 1980, Wood was posthumously given the accolade of 'Worst Director of All Time' at the Golden Turkey Awards, and revival of interest in his work followed. This led to \"Glen or Glenda\" being reissued in 1982. This cut included six minutes of additional footage. One of the restored scenes features Glen rejecting a pass made to him by a man. At this point, the film was reviewed seriously, and reclaimed as a radical work, by Steve Jenkins in the \"Monthly Film Bulletin\".\n\nThe critic Leonard Maltin names \"Glen or Glenda\" as \"possibly the worst movie ever made\".\n\nIn 1994, Tim Burton chronicled the troubled production of \"Glen or Glenda\" in \"Ed Wood\". The film includes re-creations of several key scenes, including Lugosi's narration and Glen's plea for his girlfriend's understanding at the end of the film.\nA remake of the film, entitled \"Glen & Glenda\", was released the same year as \"Ed Wood\" and featured much the same script as the original film, as well as explicit scenes.\n\nIn the 2004 horror comedy film \"Seed of Chucky\", main characters Chucky and Tiffany spend the duration of the film feuding over whether they should call their male child \"Glen or Glenda\" as he lacks genitalia.\n\nIn 2006, the distributed operating system \"Plan 9 from Bell Labs\" had a mascot, Glenda, the Plan 9 Bunny, named after \"Glen or Glenda\" and \"Plan 9 from Outer Space\".\n\nIn 2011, the film \"Jack and Jill\" was nominated for every award at the 32nd Golden Raspberry Awards, including Worst Prequel, Remake, Ripoff or Sequel, where it was declared a Remake/Ripoff of \"Glen or Glenda\", despite having nothing to do with the film, other than the lead actor dressed as a woman.\n\n\n", "id": "13154", "title": "Glen or Glenda"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13155", "text": "The Golden Turkey Awards\n\nThe Golden Turkey Awards is a 1980 book by film critic Michael Medved and his brother Harry.\n\nThe book awards \"Golden Turkey Awards\" to films judged by the authors as poor in quality, and to directors and actors judged to have created a chronically inept body of work. The book features many low-budget obscurities and exploitation films such as \"Rat Pfink a Boo Boo\", \"Attack of the 50 Foot Woman\", and the apparently lost \"Him\". Other categories include expensive, big studio failures like \"The Swarm\" and popular films such as \"Jesus Christ Superstar\".\n\nIn the introduction the authors admit that \"we know our choices will not please everyone—least of all the actors, producers, writers and directors who are honored in the pages that follow. We further recognize that the number of bad films is so enormous and the competition for the very worst is so intense, that all decisions reached here are subject to considerable second-guessing. Nevertheless, we have researched the subject thoroughly—sitting through more than 2,000 wretched films in the last few years—and we believe that our nominees and award winners can stand the test of time.\"\n\nThe Medveds had previously celebrated bad cinema in \"The Fifty Worst Films of All Time\", many of which were also featured in the various \"Golden Turkey Awards\" categories. Subsequently, they turned their attention to box office bombs in \"The Hollywood Hall of Shame\". They also published a sequel to \"The Golden Turkey Awards\", \"Son of Golden Turkey Awards,\" in 1986. They declared that \"Son of Golden Turkey Awards\" \"is our last word...we hereby solemnly pledge that the years ahead will produce no further Golden Turkey publications by the Medved Brothers...we now pass the torch to whichever brave souls feel ready to take up the challenge.\" \"Son of Golden Turkey Awards\" also listed a \"Who's Who in the World of Bad Movies\" at the end of its awards presentations.\n\nThe Golden Turkey Awards formed the basis of a 1983 television series \"The Worst of Hollywood\" hosted by Michael Medved.\n\nIn the book \"The Fifty Worst Films of All Time\" the authors invited readers to write in nominating their favorite \"worst films\". More than 3,000 ballots were received. Based on these votes, the Worst Film of All Time award was given to \"Plan 9 from Outer Space\" by Ed Wood.\n\nWood is also awarded the title of Worst Director of All Time, judged by the authors. \nRaquel Welch is judged the Worst Actress of All Time over nominees including Candice Bergen and Mamie van Doren.\n\nRichard Burton is judged as the Worst Actor of All Time over nominees John Agar, Tony Curtis and Victor Mature. While conceding he is sometimes brilliant, the authors claim Burton's \"occasional triumphs only serve to highlight the pathetic waste in most of his films; for every \"Equus\" in which he appears there are at least a half-dozen \"Cleopatra\"s or \"Boom!\"s. The authors state that \"when he is bad ... well, he's just the pits\" and list several \"bad\" films in which he has appeared: \"The Sandpiper\", \"Hammersmith Is Out\", \"The Voyage\", \"The Medusa Touch\" and \"The Assassination of Trotsky\". Another Burton film, \"\", is the book's first runner up in the Worst Film of All Time award based on reader response.\n\n\nIn addition, the Golden Turkey Awards had a reader's choice category for Worst Film of All Time, voted upon by readers of \"The Fifty Worst Films of All Time\".\n\nOne of the films nominated in the book was in fact an invention of the authors, and readers were challenged to figure out which film was actually fake. The fake film was \"Dog of Norway\" featuring \"Muki the Wonder Hound\". This film was illustrated using a photo of a co-author's dog. The giveaway was that the same dog was in the photo of the authors in the back of the book. Another film in the book, the now-lost 1974 porn film \"Him\", has also been cited as the hoax, though it is known to have existed.\n\nNo formal clarification of the hoax film was provided by the subsequent release, \"The Hollywood Hall of Shame\". That book again features the same dog pictured with the authors (as did the subsequent \"Son of Golden Turkey Awards\"). In \"The Hollywood Hall of Shame\", in reference to the dish barbecued dog, the authors explain that it was \"a snack which produced a mixed reaction among the representatives of an industry that had given the world Lassie, Rin Tin Tin, Benji, Phyllis Diller, and Muki the Wonder Hound.\"\n\nThe \"Acknowledgements\" page of \"The Fifty Worst Films of All Time\" ends with:\n\n\n", "id": "13155", "title": "The Golden Turkey Awards"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13156", "text": "George Fox\n\nGeorge Fox (July 1624 – 13 January 1691) was an English Dissenter and a founder of the Religious Society of Friends, commonly known as the Quakers or Friends.\n\nThe son of a Leicestershire weaver, Fox lived in a time of great social upheaval and war. He rebelled against the religious and political authorities by proposing an unusual and uncompromising approach to the Christian faith. He travelled throughout Britain as a dissenting preacher, for which he was often persecuted by the authorities who disapproved of his beliefs.\n\nIn 1669, Fox married Margaret Fell, the widow of one of his wealthier supporters; she was a leading Friend. His ministry expanded and he undertook tours of North America and the Low Countries. Between these tours, he was imprisoned for more than a year. He spent the final decade of his life working in London to organize the expanding Quaker movement.\n\nWhile his movement attracted disdain from some, others such as William Penn and Oliver Cromwell viewed Fox with respect.\n\nGeorge Fox was born in the strongly Puritan village of Drayton-in-the-Clay, Leicestershire, England (now known as Fenny Drayton), 15 miles (24 km) west-south-west of Leicester. He was the eldest of four children of Christopher Fox, a successful weaver, called \"Righteous Christer\" by his neighbours, and his wife, Mary Lago. Christopher Fox was a churchwarden and was relatively wealthy; when he died in the late 1650s he left his son a substantial legacy. From childhood Fox was of a serious, religious disposition. There is no record of any formal schooling but he learned to read and write. \"When I came to eleven years of age\", he said, \"I knew pureness and righteousness; for, while I was a child, I was taught how to walk to be kept pure. The Lord taught me to be faithful, in all things, and to act faithfully two ways; viz., inwardly to God, and outwardly to man.\" Known as an honest person, he also proclaimed, \"The Lord taught me to be faithful in all things...and to keep to Yea and Nay in all things.\"\n\nAs he grew up, his relatives \"thought to have made me a priest\" but he was instead apprenticed to a local shoemaker and grazier, George Gee of Mancetter. This suited his contemplative temperament and he became well known for his diligence among the wool traders who had dealings with his master. A constant obsession for Fox was the pursuit of \"simplicity\" in life, meaning humility and the abandonment of luxury, and the short time he spent as a shepherd was important to the formation of this view. Toward the end of his life he wrote a letter for general circulation pointing out that Abel, Noah, Abraham, Jacob, Moses and David were all keepers of sheep or cattle and therefore that a learned education should not be seen as a necessary qualification for ministry.\n\nGeorge Fox knew people who were \"professors\" (followers of the standard religion), but by the age of 19 he had begun to look down on their behaviour, in particular drinking alcohol. He records that, in prayer one night after leaving two acquaintances at a drinking session, he heard an inner voice saying, \"Thou seest how young people go together into vanity, and old people into the earth; thou must forsake all, young and old, keep out of all, and be as a stranger unto all.\"\n\nDriven by his \"inner voice\", Fox left Drayton-in-the-Clay in September 1643, moving toward London in a state of mental torment and confusion. The English Civil War had begun and troops were stationed in many towns through which he passed. In Barnet, he was torn by depression (perhaps from the temptations of the resort town near London). He alternately shut himself in his room for days at a time or went out alone into the countryside. After almost a year he returned to Drayton, where he engaged Nathaniel Stephens, the clergyman of his hometown, in long discussions on religious matters. Stephens considered Fox a gifted young man but the two disagreed on so many issues that he later called Fox mad and spoke against him.\n\nOver the next few years Fox continued to travel around the country as his particular religious beliefs took shape. At times he actively sought the company of clergy but found no comfort from them as they seemed unable to help with the matters troubling him. One, in Warwickshire, advised him to take tobacco (which Fox disliked) and sing psalms; another, in Coventry, lost his temper when Fox accidentally stood on a flower in his garden; a third suggested bloodletting. He became fascinated by the Bible, which he studied assiduously. He hoped to find among the \"English Dissenters\" a spiritual understanding absent from the established church but fell out with one group, for example, because he maintained that women had souls:\n\nHe thought intensely about the Temptation of Christ, which he compared to his own spiritual condition, but drew strength from his conviction that God would support and preserve him. In prayer and meditation he came to a greater understanding of the nature of his faith and what it required from him; this process he called \"opening\". He also came to what he deemed a deep inner understanding of standard Christian beliefs. Among his ideas were:\n\n\nIn 1647 Fox began to preach publicly: in market-places, fields, appointed meetings of various kinds or even sometimes \"steeple-houses\" after the service. His powerful preaching began to attract a small following. It is not clear at what point the Society of Friends was formed but there was certainly a group of people who often travelled together. At first, they called themselves \"Children of the Light\" or \"Friends of the Truth\", and later simply \"Friends\". Fox seems to have had no desire to found a sect but only to proclaim what he saw as the pure and genuine principles of Christianity in their original simplicity, though he afterward showed great prowess as a religious legislator in the organization he gave to the new society.\n\nThere were a great many rival Christian denominations holding very diverse opinions; the atmosphere of dispute and confusion gave Fox an opportunity to put forward his own beliefs through his personal sermons. Fox's preaching was grounded in scripture but was mainly effective because of the intense personal experience he was able to project. He was scathing about immorality, deceit and the exacting of tithes and urged his listeners to lead lives without sin, avoiding the Ranter's antinomian view that a believer becomes automatically sinless. By 1651 he had gathered other talented preachers around him and continued to roam the country despite a harsh reception from some listeners, who would whip and beat them to drive them away. As his reputation spread, his words were not welcomed by all. As an uncompromising preacher, he hurled disputation and contradiction to the faces of his opponents. The worship of Friends in the form of silent waiting seems to have been well-established by this time, though it is not recorded how this came to be.\n\nFox complained to judges about decisions he considered morally wrong, as in his letter on the case of a woman due to be executed for theft. He campaigned against the paying of tithes, which funded the established church and often went into the pockets of absentee landlords or religious colleges far away from the paying parishioners. In his view, as God was everywhere and anyone could preach, the established church was unnecessary and a university qualification irrelevant for a preacher. Conflict with civil authority was inevitable. Fox was imprisoned several times, the first at Nottingham in 1649. At Derby in 1650 he was imprisoned for blasphemy; a judge mocked Fox's exhortation to \"tremble at the word of the Lord\", calling him and his followers \"Quakers\". Following his refusal to fight against the return of the monarchy (or to take up arms for any reason), his sentence was doubled. The refusal to swear oaths or take up arms came to be a much more important part of his public statements. Refusal to take oaths meant that Quakers could be prosecuted under laws compelling subjects to pledge allegiance, as well as making testifying in court problematic. In a letter of 1652 (\"That which is set up by the sword\"), he urged Friends not to use \"carnal weapons\" but \"spiritual weapons\", saying \"let the waves [the power of nations] break over your heads\".\n\nIn 1652, Fox preached for several hours under a walnut tree at Balby, where his disciple Thomas Aldham was instrumental in setting up the first meeting in the Doncaster area. In June that year Fox felt that God led him to ascend Pendle Hill where he had a vision of many souls coming to Christ. From there he travelled to Sedbergh in Westmorland, where he had heard a group of Seekers were meeting, and preached to over a thousand people on Firbank Fell, convincing many, including Francis Howgill, to accept that Christ might speak to people directly. At the end of the month he stayed at Swarthmoor Hall, near Ulverston, the home of Thomas Fell, vice-chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, and his wife, Margaret. At around this time the \"ad hoc\" meetings of Friends began to be formalized and a monthly meeting was set up in County Durham. Margaret became a Quaker and, although Thomas did not convert, his familiarity with the Friends proved influential when Fox was arrested for blasphemy in October. Fell was one of three presiding judges, and had the charges dismissed on a technicality.\n\nFox remained at Swarthmoor until summer 1653 then left for Carlisle where he was arrested again for blasphemy. It was even proposed to put him to death but Parliament requested his release rather than have \"a young man ... die for religion\". Further imprisonments came at London in 1654, Launceston in 1656, Lancaster in 1660, Leicester in 1662, Lancaster again and Scarborough in 1664–66 and Worcester in 1673–75. Charges usually included causing a disturbance and travelling without a pass. Quakers fell foul of irregularly enforced laws forbidding unauthorized worship while actions motivated by belief in social equality—refusing to use or acknowledge titles, take hats off in court or bow to those who considered themselves socially superior—were seen as disrespectful. While imprisoned at Launceston Fox wrote, \"Christ our Lord and master saith 'Swear not at all, but let your communications be yea, yea, and nay, nay, for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil.' ... the Apostle James saith, 'My brethren, above all things swear not, neither by heaven, nor by earth, nor by any other oath. Lest ye fall into condemnation.'\"\n\nIn prison George Fox continued writing and preaching, feeling that imprisonment brought him into contact with people who needed his help—the jailers as well as his fellow prisoners. In his journal, he told his magistrate, \"God dwells not in temples made with hands.\" He also sought to set an example by his actions there, turning the other cheek when being beaten and refusing to show his captors any dejected feelings.\n\nParliamentarians grew suspicious of monarchist plots and fearful that the group travelling with Fox aimed to overthrow the government: by this time his meetings were regularly attracting crowds of over a thousand. In early 1655 he was arrested at Whetstone, Leicestershire and taken to London under armed guard. In March he was brought before the Lord Protector, Oliver Cromwell. After affirming that he had no intention of taking up arms Fox was able to speak with Cromwell for most of the morning about the Friends and advised him to listen to God's voice and obey it so that, as Fox left, Cromwell \"with tears in his eyes said, 'Come again to my house; for if thou and I were but an hour of a day together, we should be nearer one to the other'; adding that he wished [Fox] no more ill than he did to his own soul.\"\n\nThis episode was later recalled as an example of \"speaking truth to power\", a preaching technique by which subsequent Quakers hoped to influence the powerful. Although not used until the 20th century, the phrase is related to the ideas of plain speech and simplicity which Fox practiced, but motivated by the more worldly goal of eradicating war, injustice and oppression.\n\nFox petitioned Cromwell over the course of 1656, asking him to alleviate the persecution of Quakers. Later that year, they met for a second time at Whitehall. On a personal level, the meeting went well; despite disagreements between the two men, they had a certain rapport. Fox invited Cromwell to \"lay down his crown at the feet of Jesus\"—which Cromwell declined to do. Fox met Cromwell again twice in March 1657. Their last meeting was in 1658 at Hampton Court, though they could not speak for long or meet again because of the Protector's worsening illness—Fox even wrote that \"he looked like a dead man\". Cromwell died in September of that year.\n\nOne early Quaker convert, the Yorkshireman James Nayler, arose as a prominent preacher in London around 1655. A breach began to form between Fox's and Nayler's followers. As Fox was held prisoner at Launceston, Nayler moved south-westwards towards Launceston intending to meet Fox and heal any rift. On the way he was arrested himself and held at Exeter. After Fox was released from Launceston gaol in 1656, he preached throughout the West Country. Arriving at Exeter late in September, Fox was reunited with Nayler. Nayler and his followers refused to remove their hats while Fox prayed, which Fox took as both a personal slight and a bad example. When Nayler refused to kiss Fox's hand, Fox told Nayler to kiss his foot instead. Nayler was offended and the two parted acrimoniously. Fox wrote, \"there was now a wicked spirit risen amongst Friends\".\n\nAfter Nayler's own release later the same year he rode into Bristol triumphantly playing the part of Jesus Christ in a re-enactment of Palm Sunday. He was arrested and taken to London, where Parliament defeated a motion to execute him by 96–82. Instead, they ordered that he be pilloried and whipped through both London and Bristol, branded on his forehead with the letter B (for blasphemer), bored through the tongue with a red-hot iron and imprisoned in solitary confinement with hard labour. Nayler was released in 1659, but he was a broken man. On meeting Fox in London, he fell to his knees and begged Fox's forgiveness. Shortly afterward, Nayler was attacked by thieves while travelling home to his family, and died.\n\nThe persecutions of these years—with about a thousand Friends in prison by 1657—hardened George Fox's opinions of traditional religious and social practices. In his preaching, he often emphasized the Quaker rejection of baptism by water; this was a useful way of highlighting how the focus of Friends on inward transformation differed from what he saw as the superstition of outward ritual. It was also deliberately provocative to adherents of those practices, providing opportunities for Fox to argue with them on matters of scripture. This pattern was also found in his court appearances: when a judge challenged him to remove his hat, Fox riposted by asking where in the Bible such an injunction could be found.\n\nThe Society of Friends became increasingly organized towards the end of the decade. Large meetings were held, including a three-day event in Bedfordshire, the precursor of the present Britain Yearly Meeting system. Fox commissioned two Friends to travel around the country collecting the testimonies of imprisoned Quakers, as evidence of their persecution; this led to the establishment in 1675 of Meeting for Sufferings, which has continued to the present day.\n\nThe 1650s, when the Friends were most confrontational, was one of the most creative periods of their history. During the Commonwealth, Fox had hoped that the movement would become the major church in England. Disagreements, persecution and increasing social turmoil, however, led Fox to suffer from a severe depression, which left him deeply troubled at Reading, Berkshire, for ten weeks in 1658 or 1659. In 1659, he sent parliament his most politically radical pamphlet, \"Fifty nine Particulars laid down for the Regulating things\", but the year was so chaotic that it never considered them; the document was not reprinted until the 21st century.\n\nWith the restoration of the monarchy, Fox's dreams of establishing the Friends as the dominant religion seemed at an end. He was again accused of conspiracy, this time against Charles II, and fanaticism—a charge he resented. He was imprisoned in Lancaster for five months, during which he wrote to the king offering advice on governance: Charles should refrain from war and domestic religious persecution, and discourage oath-taking, plays, and maypole games. These last suggestions reveal Fox's Puritan leanings, which continued to influence Quakers for centuries after his death. Once again, Fox was released after demonstrating that he had no military ambitions.\n\nAt least on one point, Charles listened to Fox. The seven hundred Quakers who had been imprisoned under Richard Cromwell were released, though the government remained uncertain about the group's links with other, more violent, movements. A revolt by the Fifth Monarchists in January 1661 led to the suppression of that sect and the repression of other Nonconformists, including Quakers. In the aftermath of this attempted coup, Fox and eleven other Quakers issued a broadside proclaiming what became known among Friends in the 20th century as the \"peace testimony\": they committed themselves to oppose all outward wars and strife as contrary to the will of God. Not all his followers accepted this statement; Isaac Penington, for example, dissented for a time arguing that the state had a duty to protect the innocent from evil, if necessary by using military force. Despite the testimony, persecution against Quakers and other dissenters continued.\n\nPenington and others, such as John Perrot and John Pennyman, were uneasy at Fox's increasing power within the movement. Like Nayler before them, they saw no reason why men should remove their hats for prayer, arguing that men and women should be treated as equals and if, as according to the apostle Paul, women should cover their heads, then so could men. Perrot and Penington lost the argument. Perrot emigrated to the New World, and Fox retained leadership of the movement.\n\nParliament enacted laws which forbade non-Anglican religious meetings of more than five people, essentially making Quaker meetings illegal. Fox counseled his followers to openly violate laws that attempted to suppress the movement, and many Friends, including women and children, were jailed over the next two and a half decades. Meanwhile, Quakers in New England had been banished (and some executed), and Charles was advised by his councillors to issue a mandamus condemning this practice and allowing them to return. Fox was able to meet some of the New England Friends when they came to London, stimulating his interest in the colonies. Fox was unable to travel there immediately: he was imprisoned again in 1664 for his refusal to swear the oath of allegiance, and on his release in 1666 was preoccupied with organizational matters—he normalized the system of monthly and quarterly meetings throughout the country, and extended it to Ireland.\n\nVisiting Ireland also gave him the opportunity to preach against what he saw as the excesses of the Roman Catholic Church, in particular the use of ritual. More recent Quaker commentators have noted points of contact between the denominations: both claim the actual presence of God in their meetings, and both allow the collective opinion of the church to augment Biblical teaching. Fox, however, did not perceive this, brought up as he was in a wholly Protestant environment hostile to \"Popery\".\n\nFox married Margaret Fell of Swarthmoor Hall, a lady of high social position and one of his early converts, on 27 October 1669 at a meeting in Bristol. She was ten years his senior and had eight children (all but one of them Quakers) by her first husband, Thomas Fell, who had died in 1658. She was herself very active in the movement, and had campaigned for equality and the acceptance of women as preachers. As there were no priests at Quaker weddings to perform the ceremony, the union took the form of a civil marriage approved by the principals and the witnesses at a meeting. Ten days after the marriage, Margaret returned to Swarthmoor to continue her work there while George went back to London. Their shared religious work was at the heart of their life together, and they later collaborated on a great deal of the administration the Society required. Shortly after the marriage, Margaret was imprisoned at Lancaster; George remained in the south-east of England, becoming so ill and depressed that for a time he lost his sight.\n\nBy 1671 Fox had recovered and Margaret had been released by order of the King. Fox resolved to visit the English settlements in America and the West Indies, remaining there for two years, possibly to counter any remnants of Perrot's teaching there. After a voyage of seven weeks, during which dolphins were caught and eaten, the party arrived in Barbados on 3 October 1671. From there, Fox sent an epistle to Friends spelling out the role of women's meetings in the Quaker marriage ceremony, a point of controversy when he returned home. One of his proposals suggested that the prospective couple should be interviewed by an all-female meeting prior to the marriage to determine whether there were any financial or other impediments. Though women's meetings had been held in London for the last ten years, this was an innovation in Bristol and the north-west of England, which many there felt went too far.\n\nFox wrote a letter to the governor and assembly of the island in which he refuted charges that Quakers were stirring up the slaves to revolt and tried to affirm the orthodoxy of Quaker beliefs. After a stay in Jamaica, Fox's first landfall on the North American continent was at Maryland, where he participated in a four-day meeting of local Quakers. He remained there while various of his English companions travelled to the other colonies, because he wished to meet some Native Americans who were interested in Quaker ways—though he relates that they had \"a great dispute\" among themselves about whether to participate in the meeting. Fox was impressed by their general demeanour, which he said was \"courteous and loving\". He resented the suggestion (from a man in North Carolina) that \"the Light and Spirit of God ... was not in the Indians\", a proposition which Fox refuted. Fox left no record of encountering slaves on the mainland.\n\nElsewhere in the colonies, Fox helped to establish organizational systems for the Friends, along the same lines as he had done in Britain. He also preached to many non-Quakers, some but not all of whom were converted.\n\nFollowing extensive travels around the various American colonies, George Fox returned to England in June 1673 confident that his movement was firmly established there. Back in England, however, he found his movement sharply divided among provincial Friends (such as William Rogers, John Wilkinson and John Story) who resisted establishment of women's meetings and the power of those who resided in or near London. With William Penn and Robert Barclay as allies of Fox, the challenge to Fox's leadership was eventually put down. But in the midst of the dispute, Fox was imprisoned again for refusing to swear oaths after being captured at Armscote, Worcestershire. His mother died shortly after hearing of his arrest and Fox's health began to suffer. Margaret Fell petitioned the king for his release, which was granted, but Fox felt too weak to take up his travels immediately. Recuperating at Swarthmoor, he began dictating what would be published after his death as his journal and devoted his time to his written output: letters, both public and private, as well as books and essays. Much of his energy was devoted to the topic of oaths, having become convinced of its importance to Quaker ideas. By refusing to swear, he felt that he could bear witness to the value of truth in everyday life, as well as to God, who he associated with truth and the inner light.\n\nFor three months in 1677 and a month in 1684, Fox visited the Friends in the Netherlands, and organized their meetings for discipline. The first trip was the more extensive, taking him into what is now Germany, proceeding along the coast to Friedrichstadt and back again over several days. Meanwhile, Fox was participating in a dispute among Friends in Britain over the role of women in meetings, a struggle which took much of his energy and left him exhausted. Returning to England, he stayed in the south in order to try to end the dispute. He followed the foundation of the colony of Pennsylvania, where Penn had given him over of land, with interest. Persecution continued, with Fox arrested briefly in October 1683. Fox's health was becoming worse, but he continued his activities—writing to leaders in Poland, Denmark, Germany, and elsewhere about his beliefs, and their treatment of Quakers.\n\nIn the last years of his life, Fox continued to participate in the London Meetings, and still made representations to Parliament about the sufferings of Friends. The new King, James II, pardoned religious dissenters jailed for failure to attend the established church, leading to the release of about 1500 Friends. Though the Quakers lost influence after the Glorious Revolution, which deposed James II, the Act of Toleration 1689 put an end to the uniformity laws under which Quakers had been persecuted, permitting them to assemble freely.\n\nTwo days after preaching, as usual, at the Gracechurch Street Meeting House in London, George Fox died between 9 and 10 p.m. on 13 January 1691. He was interred in the Quaker Burying Ground, Bunhill Fields, three days later in the presence of thousands of mourners.\n\nFox's journal was first published in 1694, after editing by Thomas Ellwood—a friend and associate of John Milton—with a preface by William Penn. Like most similar works of its time the journal was not written contemporaneously to the events it describes, but rather compiled many years later, much of it dictated. Parts of the journal were not in fact by Fox at all but are constructed by its editors from diverse sources and written as if by him. The dissent within the movement and the contributions of others to the development of Quakerism are largely excluded from the narrative. Fox portrays himself as always in the right and always vindicated by God's interventions on his behalf. As a religious autobiography, Rufus Jones compared it to such works as Augustine's \"Confessions\" and John Bunyan's \"Grace Abounding to the Chief of Sinners\". It is, though, an intensely personal work with little dramatic power that only succeeds in appealing to readers after substantial editing. Historians have used it as a primary source because of its wealth of detail on ordinary life in the 17th century, and the many towns and villages which Fox visited.\n\nHundreds of Fox's letters—mostly intended for wide circulation, along with a few private communications—were also published. Written from the 1650s onwards, with such titles as \"Friends, seek the peace of all men\" or \"To Friends, to know one another in the light\", they give enormous insight into the detail of Fox's beliefs, and show his determination to spread them. These writings, in the words of Henry Cadbury, Professor of Divinity at Harvard University and a leading Quaker, \"contain a few fresh phrases of his own, [but] are generally characterized by an excess of scriptural language and today they seem dull and repetitious\". Others point out that \"Fox's sermons, rich in biblical metaphor and common speech, brought hope in a dark time.\" Fox's aphorisms have found an audience beyond Quakers, with many other church groups using them to illustrate principles of Christianity.\n\nFox is described by Ellwood as \"graceful in countenance, manly in personage, grave in gesture, courteous in conversation\". Penn says he was \"civil beyond all forms of breeding\". We are told that he was \"plain and powerful in preaching, fervent in prayer\", \"a discerner of other men's spirits, and very much master of his own\", skilful to \"speak a word in due season to the conditions and capacities of most, especially to them that were weary, and wanted soul's rest\"; \"valiant in asserting the truth, bold in defending it, patient in suffering for it, immovable as a rock\".\n\nFox's influence on the Society of Friends was tremendous, and his beliefs have largely been carried forward by that group. Perhaps his most significant achievement, other than his predominant influence in the early movement, was his leadership in overcoming the twin challenges of government prosecution after the Restoration and internal disputes that threatened its stability during the same period. Not all of his beliefs were welcome to all Quakers: his Puritan-like opposition to the arts and rejection of theological study, forestalled development of these practices among Quakers for some time.\n\nThe name of George Fox is often invoked by traditionalist Friends who dislike modern liberal attitudes to the Society's Christian origins. At the same time, Quakers and others can relate to Fox's religious experience, and even those who disagree with many of his ideas regard him as a pioneer.\n\nWalt Whitman, who was raised by parents inspired by Quaker thought, later wrote: \"George Fox stands for something too—a thought—the thought that wakes in silent hours—perhaps the deepest, most eternal thought latent in the human soul. This is the thought of God, merged in the thoughts of moral right and the immortality of identity. Great, great is this thought—aye, greater than all else.\"\n\n\nPrimary sources\nVarious editions of Fox's journal have been published from time to time since the first printing in 1694:\n\nSecondary sources\n\n", "id": "13156", "title": "George Fox"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13158", "text": "Gilles Apap\n\nGilles Apap (born 21 May 1963) is a French classical violinist. Born in Béjaïa, Algeria, he was raised in Nice, France. In 1985 he won first prize in the contemporary music category at the Yehudi Menuhin Competition. He served as concertmaster with the Santa Barbara Symphony Orchestra for 10 years, but has since focused on his career as a soloist with orchestras around the world.\n\nA virtuosic violinist, Gilles is also known for his interpretations of traditional music from Eastern Europe to America, such as gypsy, Irish, swing or bluegrass.\n\nHe recorded three CDs in the 1990s with Sony Classical Records, then formed his own company, \"Apapaziz Productions\". Since 1999, Apapaziz has recorded eight Gilles Apap CDs.\n\n\n", "id": "13158", "title": "Gilles Apap"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13159", "text": "Gunpowder Plot\n\nThe Gunpowder Plot of 1605, in earlier centuries often called the Gunpowder Treason Plot or the Jesuit Treason, was a failed assassination attempt against King James I of England and VI of Scotland by a group of provincial English Catholics led by Robert Catesby.\n\nThe plan was to blow up the House of Lords during the State Opening of England's Parliament on 5 November 1605, as the prelude to a popular revolt in the Midlands during which James's nine-year-old daughter, Princess Elizabeth, was to be installed as the Catholic head of state. Catesby may have embarked on the scheme after hopes of securing greater religious tolerance under King James had faded, leaving many English Catholics disappointed. His fellow plotters were John Wright, Thomas Wintour, Thomas Percy, Guy Fawkes, Robert Keyes, Thomas Bates, Robert Wintour, Christopher Wright, John Grant, Ambrose Rookwood, Sir Everard Digby and Francis Tresham. Fawkes, who had 10 years of military experience fighting in the Spanish Netherlands in suppression of the Dutch Revolt, was given charge of the explosives.\n\nThe plot was revealed to the authorities in an anonymous letter sent to William Parker, 4th Baron Monteagle, on 26 October 1605. During a search of the House of Lords at about midnight on 4 November 1605, Fawkes was discovered guarding 36 barrels of gunpowder—enough to reduce the House of Lords to rubble—and arrested. Most of the conspirators fled from London as they learned of the plot's discovery, trying to enlist support along the way. Several made a stand against the pursuing Sheriff of Worcester and his men at Holbeche House; in the ensuing battle, Catesby was one of those shot and killed. At their trial on 27 January 1606, eight of the survivors, including Fawkes, were convicted and sentenced to be hanged, drawn and quartered.\n\nDetails of the assassination attempt were allegedly known by the principal Jesuit of England, Father Henry Garnet. Although he was convicted of treason and sentenced to death, doubt has been cast on how much he really knew of the plot. As its existence was revealed to him through confession, Garnet was prevented from informing the authorities by the absolute confidentiality of the confessional. Although anti-Catholic legislation was introduced soon after the plot's discovery, many important and loyal Catholics retained high office during King James I's reign. The thwarting of the Gunpowder Plot was commemorated for many years afterwards by special sermons and other public events such as the ringing of church bells, which have evolved into the Bonfire Night of today.\n\nBetween 1533 and 1540, the Tudor King Henry VIII took control of the English Church from Rome, the start of several decades of religious tension in England. English Catholics struggled in a society dominated by the newly separate and increasingly Protestant Church of England. Henry's daughter, Elizabeth I, responded to the growing religious divide by introducing the Elizabethan Religious Settlement, which required anyone appointed to a public or church office to swear allegiance to the monarch as head of the Church and state. The penalties for refusal were severe; fines were imposed for recusancy, and repeat offenders risked imprisonment and execution. Catholicism became marginalised, but despite the threat of torture or execution, priests continued to practise their faith in secret.\n\nQueen Elizabeth, unmarried and childless, steadfastly refused to name an heir. Many Catholics believed that her Catholic cousin, Mary, Queen of Scots, was the legitimate heir to the English throne, but she was executed for treason in 1587. The English Secretary of State, Robert Cecil, negotiated secretly with Mary's son, James VI of Scotland, who had a strong claim to the English throne as Elizabeth's first cousin twice removed through both his parents. In the months before Elizabeth's death on 24 March 1603, Cecil prepared the way for James to succeed her.\n\nSome exiled Catholics favoured Philip II of Spain's daughter, Infanta Isabella, as Elizabeth's successor. More moderate Catholics looked to James's and Elizabeth's cousin Arbella Stuart, a woman thought to have Catholic sympathies. As Elizabeth's health deteriorated, the government detained those they considered to be the \"principal papists\", and the Privy Council grew so worried that Stuart was moved closer to London to prevent her from being kidnapped by papists.\nDespite competing claims to the English throne, the transition of power following Elizabeth's death went smoothly. James's succession was announced by a proclamation from Cecil on 24 March, which was generally celebrated. Leading papists, rather than causing trouble as anticipated, reacted to the news by offering their enthusiastic support for the new monarch. Jesuit priests, whose presence in England was punishable by death, also demonstrated their support for James, who was widely believed to embody \"the natural order of things\". James ordered a ceasefire in the conflict with Spain, and even though the two countries were still technically at war, King Philip III sent his envoy, Don Juan de Tassis, to congratulate James on his accession.\n\nFor decades, the English had lived under a monarch who refused to provide an heir, but James arrived with a family and a future line of succession. His wife, Anne of Denmark, was the daughter of a king. Their eldest child, the nine-year-old Henry, was considered a handsome and confident boy, and their two younger children, Princess Elizabeth and Prince Charles, were proof that James was able to provide heirs to continue the Protestant monarchy.\n\nJames's attitude towards Catholics was more moderate than that of his predecessor, perhaps even tolerant. He promised that he would not \"persecute any that will be quiet and give an outward obedience to the law\", and believed that exile was a better solution than capital punishment: \"I would be glad to have both their heads and their bodies separated from this whole island and transported beyond seas.\" Some Catholics believed that the martyrdom of James's mother, Mary, Queen of Scots, would encourage James to convert to the Catholic faith, and the Catholic houses of Europe may also have shared that hope. James received an envoy from the Habsburg Archduke Albert of the Southern Netherlands, ruler of the remaining Catholic territories after over 30 years of war in the Dutch Revolt by English-supported Protestant rebels. For the Catholic expatriates engaged in that struggle, the restoration by force of a Catholic monarchy was an intriguing possibility, but following the failed Spanish invasion of England in 1588 the papacy had taken a longer-term view on the return of a Catholic monarch to the English throne.\n\nDuring the late 16th century, Catholics made several assassination attempts against Protestant rulers in Europe and in England, including plans to poison Elizabeth I. The Jesuit Juan de Mariana's 1598 \"On Kings and the Education of Kings\" explicitly justified the assassination of the French king Henry III—who had been stabbed to death by a Catholic fanatic in 1589—and until the 1620s, some English Catholics believed that regicide was justifiable to remove tyrants from power. Much of the \"rather nervous\" James I's political writing was \"concerned with the threat of Catholic assassination and refutation of the [Catholic] argument that 'faith did not need to be kept with heretics'\".\n\nIn the absence of any sign that James would move to end the persecution of Catholics, as some had hoped for, several members of the clergy (including two anti-Jesuit priests) decided to take matters into their own hands. In what became known as the Bye Plot, the priests William Watson and William Clark planned to kidnap James and hold him in the Tower of London until he agreed to be more tolerant towards Catholics. Cecil received news of the plot from several sources, including the Archpriest George Blackwell, who instructed his priests to have no part in any such schemes. At about the same time, Lord Cobham, Lord Grey de Wilton, Griffin Markham and Walter Raleigh hatched what became known as the Main Plot, which involved removing James and his family and supplanting them with Arbella Stuart. Amongst others, they approached Henry IV of France for funding, but were unsuccessful. All those involved in both plots were arrested in July and tried in autumn 1603; Sir George Brooke was executed, but James, keen not to have too bloody a start to his reign, reprieved Cobham, Grey, and Markham while they were at the scaffold. Raleigh, who had watched while his colleagues sweated, and who was due to be executed a few days later, was also pardoned. Stuart denied any knowledge of the Main Plot. The two priests, condemned by the pope, and \"very bloodily handled\", were executed.\n\nThe Catholic community responded to news of these plots with shock. That the Bye Plot had been revealed by Catholics was instrumental in saving them from further persecution, and James was grateful enough to allow pardons for those recusants who sued for them, as well as postponing payment of their fines for a year.\n\nOn 19 February 1604, shortly after he discovered that his wife, Queen Anne, had been sent a rosary from the pope via one of James's spies, Sir Anthony Standen, James denounced the Catholic Church. Three days later, he ordered all Jesuits and all other Catholic priests to leave the country, and reimposed the collection of fines for recusancy. James changed his focus from the anxieties of English Catholics to the establishment of an Anglo-Scottish union. He also appointed Scottish nobles such as George Home to his court, which proved unpopular with the Parliament of England. Some Members of Parliament made it clear that in their view, the \"effluxion of people from the Northern parts\" was unwelcome, and compared them to \"plants which are transported from barren ground into a more fertile one\". Even more discontent resulted when the King allowed his Scottish nobles to collect the recusancy fines. There were 5,560 convicted of recusancy in 1605, of whom 112 were landowners. The very few Catholics of great wealth who refused to attend services at their parish church were fined £20 per month. Those of more moderate means had to pay two-thirds of their annual rental income; middle class recusants were fined one shilling a week, although the collection of all these fines was \"haphazard and negligent\". When James came to power, almost £5,000 a year (equivalent to over £10 million in 2008) was being raised by these fines.\n\nOn 19 March, the King gave his opening speech to his first English Parliament in which he spoke of his desire to secure peace, but only by \"profession of the true religion\". He also spoke of a Christian union and reiterated his desire to avoid religious persecution. For the Catholics, the King's speech made it clear that they were not to \"increase their number and strength in this Kingdom\", that \"they might be in hope to erect their Religion again\". To Father John Gerard, these words were almost certainly responsible for the heightened levels of persecution the members of his faith now suffered, and for the priest Oswald Tesimond they were a rebuttal of the early claims that the King had made, upon which the papists had built their hopes. A week after James's speech, Lord Sheffield informed the king of over 900 recusants brought before the Assizes in Normanby, and on 24 April a Bill was introduced in Parliament which threatened to outlaw all English followers of the Catholic Church.\n\nThe conspirators' principal aim was to kill King James, but many other important targets would also be present at the State Opening, including the monarch's nearest relatives and members of the Privy Council. The senior judges of the English legal system, most of the Protestant aristocracy, and the bishops of the Church of England would all have attended in their capacity as members of the House of Lords, along with the members of the House of Commons. Another important objective was the kidnapping of the King's daughter, third in the line of succession, Princess Elizabeth. Housed at Coombe Abbey near Coventry, the Princess lived only ten miles north of Warwick—convenient for the plotters, most of whom lived in the Midlands. Once the King and his Parliament were dead, the plotters intended to install Elizabeth on the English throne as a titular Queen. The fate of Princes Henry and Charles would be improvised; their role in state ceremonies was, as yet, uncertain. The plotters planned to use Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland, as Elizabeth's Protector, but most likely never informed him of this.\n\nRobert Catesby (1573–1605), a man of \"ancient, historic and distinguished lineage\", was the inspiration behind the plot. He was described by contemporaries as \"a good-looking man, about six feet tall, athletic and a good swordsman\". Along with several other conspirators, he took part in the Earl of Essex's rebellion in 1601, during which he was wounded and captured. Queen Elizabeth allowed him to escape with his life after fining him 4,000 marks (equivalent to more than £6 million in 2008), after which he sold his estate in Chastleton. In 1603 Catesby helped to organise a mission to the new king of Spain, Philip III, urging Philip to launch an invasion attempt on England, which they assured him would be well supported, particularly by the English Catholics. Thomas Wintour (1571–1606) was chosen as the emissary, but the Spanish king, although sympathetic to the plight of Catholics in England, was intent on making peace with James. Wintour had also attempted to convince the Spanish envoy Don Juan de Tassis that \"3,000 Catholics\" were ready and waiting to support such an invasion. Concern was voiced by Pope Clement VIII that using violence to achieve a restoration of Catholic power in England would result in the destruction of those that remained.\n\nAccording to contemporary accounts, in February 1604 Catesby invited Thomas Wintour to his house in Lambeth, where they discussed Catesby's plan to re-establish Catholicism in England by blowing up the House of Lords during the State Opening of Parliament. Wintour was known as a competent scholar, able to speak several languages, and he had fought with the English army in the Netherlands. His uncle, Francis Ingleby, had been executed for being a Catholic priest in 1586, and Wintour later converted to Catholicism. Also present at the meeting was John Wright, a devout Catholic said to be one of the best swordsmen of his day, and a man who had taken part with Catesby in the Earl of Essex's rebellion three years earlier. Despite his reservations over the possible repercussions should the attempt fail, Wintour agreed to join the conspiracy, perhaps persuaded by Catesby's rhetoric: \"Let us give the attempt and where it faileth, pass no further.\"\n\nWintour travelled to Flanders to enquire about Spanish support. While there he sought out Guy Fawkes (1570–1606), a committed Catholic who had served as a soldier in the Southern Netherlands under the command of William Stanley, and who in 1603 was recommended for a captaincy. Accompanied by John Wright's brother Christopher, Fawkes had also been a member of the 1603 delegation to the Spanish court pleading for an invasion of England. Wintour told Fawkes that \"some good frends of his wished his company in Ingland\", and that certain gentlemen \"were uppon a resolution to doe some whatt in Ingland if the pece with Spain healped us nott\". The two men returned to England late in April 1604, telling Catesby that Spanish support was unlikely. Thomas Percy, Catesby's friend and John Wright's brother-in-law, was introduced to the plot several weeks later. Percy had found employment with his kinsman the Earl of Northumberland, and by 1596 was his agent for the family's northern estates. About 1600–1601 he served with his patron in the Low Countries. At some point during Northumberland's command in the Low Countries, Percy became his agent in his communications with James. Percy was reputedly a \"serious\" character who had converted to the Catholic faith. His early years were, according to a Catholic source, marked by a tendency to rely on \"his sword and personal courage\". Northumberland, although not a Catholic himself, planned to build a strong relationship with James in order to better the prospects of English Catholics, and to reduce the family disgrace caused by his separation from his wife Martha Wright, a favourite of Elizabeth. Thomas Percy's meetings with James seemed to go well. Percy returned with promises of support for the Catholics, and Northumberland believed that James would go so far as to allow Mass in private houses, so as not to cause public offence. Percy, keen to improve his standing, went further, claiming that the future King would guarantee the safety of English Catholics.\n\nThe first meeting between the five conspirators took place on 20 May 1604, probably at the Duck and Drake Inn, just off the Strand, Thomas Wintour's usual residence when staying in London. Catesby, Thomas Wintour, and John Wright were in attendance, joined by Guy Fawkes and Thomas Percy. Alone in a private room, the five plotters swore an oath of secrecy on a prayer book. By coincidence, and ignorant of the plot, Father John Gerard (a friend of Catesby's) was celebrating Mass in another room, and the five men subsequently received the Eucharist.\n\nFollowing their oath, the plotters left London and returned to their homes. The adjournment of Parliament gave them, they thought, until February 1605 to finalise their plans. On 9 June, Percy's patron, the Earl of Northumberland, appointed him to the Honourable Corps of Gentlemen at Arms, a mounted troop of 50 bodyguards to the King. This role gave Percy reason to seek a base in London, and a small property near the Prince's Chamber owned by Henry Ferrers, a tenant of John Whynniard, was chosen. Percy arranged for the use of the house through Northumberland's agents, Dudley Carleton and John Hippisley. Fawkes, using the pseudonym \"John Johnson\", took charge of the building, posing as Percy's servant. The building was occupied by Scottish commissioners appointed by the King to consider his plans for the unification of England and Scotland, so the plotters hired Catesby's lodgings in Lambeth, on the opposite bank of the Thames, from where their stored gunpowder and other supplies could be conveniently rowed across each night. Meanwhile, King James continued with his policies against the Catholics, and Parliament pushed through anti-Catholic legislation, until its adjournment on 7 July.\n\nThe conspirators returned to London in October 1604, when Robert Keyes, a \"desperate man, ruined and indebted\" was admitted to the group. His responsibility was to take charge of Catesby's house in Lambeth, where the gunpowder and other supplies were to be stored. Keyes's family had notable connections; his wife's employer was the Catholic Lord Mordaunt. Tall, with a red beard, he was seen as trustworthy and, like Fawkes, capable of looking after himself. In December Catesby recruited his servant, Thomas Bates, into the plot, after the latter accidentally became aware of it.\n\nIt was announced on 24 December that the re-opening of Parliament would be delayed. Concern over the plague meant that rather than sitting in February, as the plotters had originally planned for, Parliament would not sit again until 3 October 1605. The contemporaneous account of the prosecution claimed that during this delay the conspirators were digging a tunnel beneath Parliament. This may have been a government fabrication, as no evidence for the existence of a tunnel was presented by the prosecution, and no trace of one has ever been found. The account of a tunnel comes directly from Thomas Wintour's confession, and Guy Fawkes did not admit the existence of such a scheme until his fifth interrogation. Logistically, digging a tunnel would have proved extremely difficult, especially as none of the conspirators had any experience of mining. If the story is true, by 6 December the Scottish commissioners had finished their work, and the conspirators were busy tunnelling from their rented house to the House of Lords. They ceased their efforts when, during tunnelling, they heard a noise from above. The noise turned out to be the then-tenant's widow, who was clearing out the undercroft directly beneath the House of Lords—the room where the plotters eventually stored the gunpowder.\n\nBy the time the plotters reconvened at the start of the old style new year on Lady Day, 25 March, three more had been admitted to their ranks; Robert Wintour, John Grant, and Christopher Wright. The additions of Wintour and Wright were obvious choices. Along with a small fortune, Robert Wintour inherited Huddington Court (a known refuge for priests) near Worcester, and was reputedly a generous and well-liked man. A devout Catholic, he married Gertrude Talbot, who was from a family of recusants. Christopher Wright (1568–1605), John's brother, had also taken part in the Earl of Essex's revolt and had moved his family to Twigmore in Lincolnshire, then known as something of a haven for priests. John Grant was married to Wintour's sister, Dorothy, and was lord of the manor of Norbrook near Stratford-upon-Avon. Reputed to be an intelligent, thoughtful man, he sheltered Catholics at his home at Snitterfield, and was another who had been involved in the Essex revolt of 1601.\n\nIn addition, 25 March was the day on which the plotters purchased the lease to the undercroft they had supposedly tunnelled near to, owned by John Whynniard. The Palace of Westminster in the early 17th century was a warren of buildings clustered around the medieval chambers, chapels, and halls of the former royal palace that housed both Parliament and the various royal law courts. The old palace was easily accessible; merchants, lawyers, and others, lived and worked in the lodgings, shops, and taverns within its precincts. Whynniard's building was along a right-angle to the House of Lords, alongside a passageway called Parliament Place, which itself led to Parliament Stairs and the River Thames. Undercrofts were common features at the time, used to house a variety of materials including food and firewood. Whynniard's undercroft, on the ground floor, was directly beneath the first-floor House of Lords, and may once have been part of the palace's medieval kitchen. Unused and filthy, its location was ideal for what the group planned to do.\n\nIn the second week of June Catesby met in London the principal Jesuit in England, Father Henry Garnet, and asked him about the morality of entering into an undertaking which might involve the destruction of the innocent, together with the guilty. Garnet answered that such actions could often be excused, but according to his own account later admonished Catesby during a second meeting in July in Essex, showing him a letter from the pope which forbade rebellion. Soon after, the Jesuit priest Oswald Tesimond told Garnet he had taken Catesby's confession, in the course of which he had learnt of the plot. Garnet and Catesby met for a third time on 24 July 1605, at the house of the wealthy catholic Anne Vaux in Enfield Chase. Garnet decided that Tesimond's account had been given under the seal of the confessional, and that canon law therefore forbade him to repeat what he had heard. Without acknowledging that he was aware of the precise nature of the plot, Garnet attempted to dissuade Catesby from his course, to no avail. Garnet wrote to a colleague in Rome, Claudio Acquaviva, expressing his concerns about open rebellion in England. He also told Acquaviva that \"there is a risk that some private endeavour may commit treason or use force against the King\", and urged the pope to issue a public brief against the use of force.\n\nAccording to Fawkes, 20 barrels of gunpowder were brought in at first, followed by 16 more on 20 July. The supply of gunpowder was theoretically controlled by the government, but it was easily obtained from illicit sources. On 28 July, the ever-present threat of the plague again delayed the opening of Parliament, this time until Tuesday 5 November. Fawkes left the country for a short time. The King, meanwhile, spent much of the summer away from the city, hunting. He stayed wherever was convenient, including on occasion at the houses of prominent Catholics. Garnet, convinced that the threat of an uprising had receded, travelled the country on a pilgrimage.\n\nIt is uncertain when Fawkes returned to England, but he was back in London by late August, when he and Wintour discovered that the gunpowder stored in the undercroft had decayed. More gunpowder was brought into the room, along with firewood to conceal it. The final three conspirators were recruited in late 1605. At Michaelmas, Catesby persuaded the staunchly Catholic Ambrose Rookwood to rent Clopton House near Stratford-upon-Avon. Rookwood was a young man with recusant connections, whose stable of horses at Coldham Hall in Stanningfield, Suffolk was an important factor in his enlistment. His parents, Robert Rookwood and Dorothea Drury, were wealthy landowners, and had educated their son at a Jesuit school near Calais. Everard Digby was a young man who was generally well liked, and lived at Gayhurst House in Buckinghamshire. He had been knighted by the King in April 1603, and was converted to Catholicism by Gerard. Digby and his wife, Mary Mulshaw, had accompanied the priest on his pilgrimage, and the two men were reportedly close friends. Digby was asked by Catesby to rent Coughton Court near Alcester. Digby also promised £1,500 after Percy failed to pay the rent due for the properties he had taken in Westminster. Finally, on 14 October Catesby invited Francis Tresham into the conspiracy. Tresham was the son of the Catholic Thomas Tresham, and a cousin to Robert Catesby—the two had been raised together. He was also the heir to his father's large fortune, which had been depleted by recusant fines, expensive tastes, and by Francis and Catesby's involvement in the Essex revolt.\n\nCatesby and Tresham met at the home of Tresham's brother-in-law and cousin, Lord Stourton. In his confession, Tresham claimed that he had asked Catesby if the plot would damn their souls, to which Catesby had replied it would not, and that the plight of England's Catholics required that it be done. Catesby also apparently asked for £2,000, and the use of Rushton Hall in Northamptonshire. Tresham declined both offers (although he did give £100 to Thomas Wintour), and told his interrogators that he had moved his family from Rushton to London in advance of the plot; hardly the actions of a guilty man, he claimed.\n\nThe details of the plot were finalised in October, in a series of taverns across London and Daventry. Fawkes would be left to light the fuse and then escape across the Thames, while simultaneously a revolt in the Midlands would help to ensure the capture of Princess Elizabeth. Fawkes would leave for the continent, to explain events in England to the European Catholic powers.\n\nThe wives of those involved and Anne Vaux (a friend of Garnet who often shielded priests at her home) became increasingly concerned by what they suspected was about to happen. Several of the conspirators expressed worries about the safety of fellow Catholics who would be present in Parliament on the day of the planned explosion. Percy was concerned for his patron, Northumberland, and the young Earl of Arundel's name was brought up; Catesby suggested that a minor wound might keep him from the chamber on that day. The Lords Vaux, Montague, Monteagle, and Stourton were also mentioned. Keyes suggested warning Lord Mordaunt, his wife's employer, to derision from Catesby.\n\nOn Saturday 26 October, Monteagle (Tresham's brother-in-law) received an anonymous letter while at his house in Hoxton. Having broken the seal, he handed the letter to a servant who read it aloud:\n\nUncertain of the letter's meaning, Monteagle promptly rode to Whitehall and handed it to Cecil (then Earl of Salisbury). Salisbury informed the Earl of Worcester, considered to have recusant sympathies, and the suspected papist Henry Howard, 1st Earl of Northampton, but kept news of the plot from the King, who was busy hunting in Cambridgeshire and not expected back for several days. Monteagle's servant, Thomas Ward, had family connections with the Wright brothers, and sent a message to Catesby about the betrayal. Catesby, who had been due to go hunting with the King, suspected that Tresham was responsible for the letter, and with Thomas Wintour confronted the recently recruited conspirator. Tresham managed to convince the pair that he had not written the letter, but urged them to abandon the plot. Salisbury was already aware of certain stirrings before he received the letter, but did not yet know the exact nature of the plot, or who exactly was involved. He therefore elected to wait, to see how events unfolded.\n\nThe letter was shown to the King on Friday 1 November following his arrival back in London. Upon reading it, James immediately seized upon the word \"blow\" and felt that it hinted at \"some strategem of fire and powder\", perhaps an explosion exceeding in violence the one that killed his father, Lord Darnley, at Kirk o' Field in 1567. Keen not to seem too intriguing, and wanting to allow the King to take the credit for unveiling the conspiracy, Salisbury feigned ignorance. The following day members of the Privy Council visited the King at the Palace of Whitehall and informed him that, based on the information that Salisbury had given them a week earlier, on Monday the Lord Chamberlain Thomas Howard, 1st Earl of Suffolk would undertake a search of the Houses of Parliament, \"both above and below\". On Sunday 3 November Percy, Catesby and Wintour had a final meeting, where Percy told his colleagues that they should \"abide the uttermost triall\", and reminded them of their ship waiting at anchor on the Thames. By 4 November Digby was ensconced with a \"hunting party\" at Dunchurch, ready to abduct Princess Elizabeth. The same day, Percy visited the Earl of Northumberland—who was uninvolved in the conspiracy—to see if he could discern what rumours surrounded the letter to Monteagle. Percy returned to London and assured Wintour, John Wright, and Robert Keyes that they had nothing to be concerned about, and returned to his lodgings on Gray's Inn Road. That same evening Catesby, likely accompanied by John Wright and Bates, set off for the Midlands. Fawkes visited Keyes, and was given a pocket watch left by Percy, to time the fuse, and an hour later Rookwood received several engraved swords from a local cutler.\nAlthough two accounts of the number of searches and their timing exist, according to the King's version, the first search of the buildings in and around Parliament was made on Monday 4 November—as the plotters were busy making their final preparations—by Suffolk, Monteagle, and John Whynniard. They found a large pile of firewood in the undercroft beneath the House of Lords, accompanied by what they presumed to be a serving man (Fawkes), who told them that the firewood belonged to his master, Thomas Percy. They left to report their findings, at which time Fawkes also left the building. The mention of Percy's name aroused further suspicion as he was already known to the authorities as a Catholic agitator. The King insisted that a more thorough search be undertaken. Late that night, the search party, headed by Thomas Knyvet, returned to the undercroft. They again found Fawkes, dressed in a cloak and hat, and wearing boots and spurs. He was arrested, whereupon he gave his name as John Johnson. He was carrying a lantern now held in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, and a search of his person revealed a pocket watch, several slow matches and touchwood. The barrels of gunpowder were discovered hidden under piles of faggots and coal. Fawkes was taken to the King early on the morning of 5 November.\n\nAs news of \"John Johnson's\" arrest spread among the plotters still in London, most fled northwest, along Watling Street. Christopher Wright and Thomas Percy left together. Rookwood left soon after, and managed to cover 30 miles in two hours on one horse. He overtook Keyes, who had set off earlier, then Wright and Percy at Little Brickhill, before catching Catesby, John Wright, and Bates on the same road. Reunited, the group continued northwest to Dunchurch, using horses provided by Digby. Keyes went to Mordaunt's house at Drayton. Meanwhile, Thomas Wintour stayed in London, and even went to Westminster to see what was happening. When he realised the plot had been uncovered, he took his horse and made for his sister's house at Norbrook, before continuing to Huddington Court.\n\nThe group of six conspirators stopped at Ashby St Ledgers at about 6 pm, where they met Robert Wintour and updated him on their situation. They then continued on to Dunchurch, and met with Digby. Catesby convinced him that despite the plot's failure, an armed struggle was still a real possibility. He announced to Digby's \"hunting party\" that the King and Salisbury were dead, before the fugitives moved west to Warwick.\n\nIn London, news of the plot was spreading, and the authorities set extra guards on the city gates, closed the ports, and protected the house of the Spanish Ambassador, which was surrounded by an angry mob. An arrest warrant was issued against Thomas Percy, and his patron, the Earl of Northumberland, was placed under house arrest. In \"John Johnson's\" initial interrogation he revealed nothing other than the name of his mother, and that he was from Yorkshire. A letter to Guy Fawkes was discovered on his person, but he claimed that name was one of his aliases. Far from denying his intentions, \"Johnson\" stated that it had been his purpose to destroy the King and Parliament. Nevertheless, he maintained his composure and insisted that he had acted alone. His unwillingness to yield so impressed the King that he described him as possessing \"a Roman resolution\".\n\nOn 6 November, the Lord Chief Justice, Sir John Popham (a man with a deep-seated hatred of Catholics) questioned Rookwood's servants. By the evening he had learned the names of several of those involved in the conspiracy: Catesby, Rookwood, Keyes, Wynter , John and Christopher Wright, and Grant. \"Johnson\" meanwhile persisted with his story, and along with the gunpowder he was found with, was moved to the Tower of London, where the King had decided that \"Johnson\" would be tortured. The use of torture was forbidden, except by royal prerogative or a body such as the Privy Council or Star Chamber. In a letter of 6 November James wrote: \"The gentler tortours [tortures] are to be first used unto him, \"et sic per gradus ad ima tenditur\" [and thus by steps extended to greater ones], and so God speed your good work.\" \"Johnson\" may have been placed in manacles and hung from the wall, but he was almost certainly subjected to the horrors of the rack. On 7 November his resolve was broken; he confessed late that day, and again over the following two days.\n\nOn 6 November, with Fawkes maintaining his silence, the fugitives raided Warwick Castle for supplies and continued to Norbrook to collect weapons. From there they continued their journey to Huddington. Bates left the group and travelled to Coughton Court to deliver a letter from Catesby, to Father Garnet and the other priests, informing them of what had transpired, and asking for their help in raising an army. Garnet replied by begging Catesby and his followers to stop their \"wicked actions\", before himself fleeing. Several priests set out for Warwick, worried about the fate of their colleagues. They were caught, and then imprisoned in London. Catesby and the others arrived at Huddington early in the afternoon, and were met by Thomas Wintour. They received practically no support or sympathy from those they met, including family members, who were terrified at the prospect of being associated with treason. They continued on to Holbeche House on the border of Staffordshire, the home of Stephen Littleton, a member of their ever-decreasing band of followers. Tired and desperate, they spread out some of the now-soaked gunpowder in front of the fire, to dry out. Although gunpowder does not explode unless physically contained, a spark from the fire landed on the powder and the resultant flames engulfed Catesby, Rookwood, Grant, and a man named Morgan (a member of the hunting party).\n\nThomas Wintour and Littleton, on their way from Huddington to Holbeche House, were told by a messenger that Catesby had died. At that point, Littleton left, but Thomas arrived at the house to find Catesby alive, albeit scorched. John Grant was not so lucky, and had been blinded by the fire. Digby, Robert Wintour and his half-brother John, and Thomas Bates, had all left. Of the plotters, only the singed figures of Catesby and Grant, and the Wright brothers, Rookwood, and Percy, remained. The fugitives resolved to stay in the house and wait for the arrival of the King's men.\n\nRichard Walsh (Sheriff of Worcestershire) and his company of 200 men besieged Holbeche House on the morning of 8 November. Thomas Wintour was hit in the shoulder while crossing the courtyard. John Wright was shot, followed by his brother, and then Rookwood. Catesby and Percy were reportedly killed by a single lucky shot. The attackers rushed the property, and stripped the dead or dying defenders of their clothing. Grant, Morgan, Rookwood, and Wintour were arrested.\n\nBates and Keyes were captured shortly after Holbeche House was taken. Digby, who had intended to give himself up, was caught by a small group of pursuers. Tresham was arrested on 12 November, and taken to the Tower three days later. Montague, Mordaunt, and Stourton (Tresham's brother-in-law) were also imprisoned in the Tower. The Earl of Northumberland joined them on 27 November. Meanwhile the government used the revelation of the plot to accelerate its persecution of Catholics. The home of Anne Vaux at Enfield Chase was searched, revealing the presence of trap doors and hidden passages. A terrified servant then revealed that Garnet, who had often stayed at the house, had recently given a Mass there. Father John Gerard was secreted at the home of Elizabeth Vaux, in Harrowden. Elizabeth was taken to London for interrogation. There she was resolute; she had never been aware that Gerard was a priest, she had presumed he was a \"Catholic gentleman\", and she did not know of his whereabouts. The homes of the conspirators were searched, and looted; Mary Digby's household was ransacked, and she was made destitute. Some time before the end of November, Garnet moved to Hindlip Hall near Worcester, the home of the Habingtons, where he wrote a letter to the Privy Council protesting his innocence.\n\nThe foiling of the Gunpowder Plot initiated a wave of national relief at the delivery of the King and his sons, and inspired in the ensuing parliament a mood of loyalty and goodwill, which Salisbury astutely exploited to extract higher subsidies for the King than any (bar one) granted in Elizabeth's reign. Walter Raleigh, who was languishing in the Tower owing to his involvement in the Main Plot, and whose wife was a first cousin of Lady Catesby, declared he had had no knowledge of the conspiracy. The Bishop of Rochester gave a sermon at St. Paul's Cross, in which he condemned the plot. In his speech to both Houses on 9 November, James expounded on two emerging preoccupations of his monarchy: the divine right of kings and the Catholic question. He insisted that the plot had been the work of only a few Catholics, not of the English Catholics as a whole, and he reminded the assembly to rejoice at his survival, since kings were divinely appointed and he owed his escape to a miracle. Salisbury wrote to his English ambassadors abroad, informing them of what had occurred, and also reminding them that the King bore no ill will to his Catholic neighbours. The foreign powers largely distanced themselves from the plotters, calling them atheists and Protestant heretics.\n\nSir Edward Coke was in charge of the interrogations. Over a period of about ten weeks, in the Lieutenant's Lodgings at the Tower of London (now known as the Queen's House) he questioned those who had been implicated in the plot. For the first round of interrogations, no real proof exists that these people were tortured, although on several occasions Salisbury certainly suggested that they should be. Coke later revealed that the threat of torture was in most cases enough to elicit a confession from those caught up in the aftermath of the plot.\n\nOnly two confessions were printed in full: Fawkes's confession of 8 November, and Wintour's of 23 November. Having been involved in the conspiracy from the start (unlike Fawkes), Wintour was able to give extremely valuable information to the Privy Council. The handwriting on his testimony is almost certainly that of the man himself, but his signature was markedly different. Wintour had previously only ever signed his name as such, but his confession is signed \"Winter\", and since he had been shot in the shoulder, the steady hand used to write the signature may indicate some measure of government interference—or it may indicate that writing a shorter version of his name was less painful. Wintour's testimony makes no mention of his brother, Robert. Both were published in the so-called \"King's Book\", a hastily written official account of the conspiracy published in late November 1605.\n\nHenry Percy, Earl of Northumberland, was in a difficult position. His midday dinner with Thomas Percy on 4 November was damning evidence against him, and after Thomas Percy's death there was nobody who could either implicate him or clear him. The Privy Council suspected that Northumberland would have been Princess Elizabeth's protector had the plot succeeded, but there was insufficient evidence to convict him. Northumberland remained in the Tower and on 27 June 1606 was finally charged with contempt. He was stripped of all public offices, fined £30,000 (about £ in 2017), and kept in the Tower until June 1621. The Lords Mordaunt and Stourton were tried in the Star Chamber. They were condemned to imprisonment in the Tower, where they remained until 1608, when they were transferred to the Fleet Prison. Both were also given significant fines.\n\nSeveral other people not involved in the conspiracy, but known or related to the conspirators, were also questioned. Northumberland's brothers, Sir Allen and Sir Josceline, were arrested. Anthony-Maria Browne, 2nd Viscount Montagu had employed Fawkes at an early age, and had also met Catesby on 29 October, and was therefore of interest; he was released several months later. Agnes Wenman was from a Catholic family, and related to Elizabeth Vaux. She was examined twice but the charges against her were eventually dropped. Percy's secretary and later the controller of Northumberland's household, Dudley Carleton, had leased the vault where the gunpowder was stored, and consequently he was imprisoned in the Tower. Salisbury believed his story, and authorised his release.\n\nThomas Bates confessed on 4 December, providing much of the information that Salisbury needed to link the Catholic clergy to the plot. Bates had been present at most of the conspirators' meetings, and under interrogation he implicated Father Tesimond in the plot. On 13 January 1606 he described how he had visited Garnet and Tesimond on 7 November to inform Garnet of the plot's failure. Bates also told his interrogators of his ride with Tesimond to Huddington, before the priest left him to head for the Habingtons at Hindlip Hall, and of a meeting between Garnet, Gerard, and Tesimond in October 1605. At about the same time in December, Tresham's health began to deteriorate. He was visited regularly by his wife, a nurse, and his servant William Vavasour, who documented his strangury. Before he died Tresham had also told of Garnet's involvement with the 1603 mission to Spain, but in his last hours he retracted some of these statements. Nowhere in his confession did he mention the Monteagle letter. He died early on the morning of 23 December, and was buried in the Tower. Nevertheless he was attainted along with the other plotters, his head was set on a pike either at Northampton or London Bridge, and his estates confiscated.\n\nOn 15 January a proclamation named Father Garnet, Father Gerard, and Father Greenway (Tesimond) as wanted men. Tesimond and Gerard managed to escape the country and live out their days in freedom; Garnet was not so lucky. Several days earlier, on 9 January, Robert Wintour and Stephen Littleton were captured. Their hiding place at Hagley, the home of Humphrey Littleton (brother of MP John Littleton, imprisoned for treason in 1601 for his part in the Essex revolt) was betrayed by a cook, who grew suspicious of the amount of food sent up for his master's consumption. Humphrey denied the presence of the two fugitives, but another servant led the authorities to their hiding place. On 20 January the local Justice and his retainers arrived at Thomas Habington's home, Hindlip Hall, to arrest the Jesuits. Despite Thomas Habington's protests, the men spent the next four days searching the house. On 24 January, starving, two priests left their hiding places and were discovered. Humphrey Littleton, who had escaped from the authorities at Hagley, got as far as Prestwood in Staffordshire before he was captured. He was imprisoned, and then condemned to death at Worcester. On 26 January, in exchange for his life, he told the authorities where they could find Father Garnet. Worn down by hiding for so long, Garnet, accompanied by another priest, emerged from his priest hole the next day.\n\nBy coincidence, on the same day that Garnet was found, the surviving conspirators were arraigned in Westminster Hall. Seven of the prisoners were taken from the Tower to the Star Chamber by barge. Bates, who was considered lower class, was brought from the Gatehouse Prison. Some of the prisoners were reportedly despondent, but others were nonchalant, even smoking tobacco. The King and his family, hidden from view, were among the many who watched the trial. The Lords Commissioners present were the Earls of Suffolk, Worcester, Northampton, Devonshire, and Salisbury. Sir John Popham was Lord Chief Justice, Sir Thomas Fleming was Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and two Justices, Sir Thomas Walmsley and Sir Peter Warburton, sat as Justices of the Common Pleas. The list of traitors' names was read aloud, beginning with those of the priests: Garnet, Tesimond, and Gerard.\n\nThe first to speak was the Speaker of the House of Commons (later Master of the Rolls), Sir Edward Philips, who described the intent behind the plot in lurid detail. He was followed by the Attorney-General Sir Edward Coke, who began with a long speech—the content of which was heavily influenced by Salisbury—that included a denial that the King had ever made any promises to the Catholics. Monteagle's part in the discovery of the plot was welcomed, and denunciations of the 1603 mission to Spain featured strongly. Fawkes's protestations that Gerard knew nothing of the plot were omitted from Coke's speech. The foreign powers, when mentioned, were accorded due respect, but the priests were accursed, their behaviour analysed and criticised wherever possible. There was little doubt, according to Coke, that the plot had been invented by the Jesuits. Garnet's meeting with Catesby, at which the former was said to have absolved the latter of any blame in the plot, was proof enough that the Jesuits were central to the conspiracy; according to Coke the Gunpowder Plot would always be known as the Jesuit Treason. Coke spoke with feeling of the probable fate of the Queen and the rest of the King's family, and of the innocents who would have been caught up in the explosion.\n\nEach of the condemned, said Coke, would be drawn backwards to his death, by a horse, his head near the ground. He was to be \"put to death halfway between heaven and earth as unworthy of both\". His genitals would be cut off and burnt before his eyes, and his bowels and heart then removed. Then he would be decapitated, and the dismembered parts of his body displayed so that they might become \"prey for the fowls of the air\". Confessions and declarations from the prisoners were then read aloud, and finally the prisoners were allowed to speak. Rookwood claimed that he had been drawn into the plot by Catesby, \"whom he loved above any worldy man\". Thomas Wintour begged to be hanged for himself and his brother, so that his brother might be spared. Fawkes explained his not guilty plea as ignorance of certain aspects of the indictment. Keyes appeared to accept his fate, Bates and Robert Wintour begged for mercy, and Grant explained his involvement as \"a conspiracy intended but never effected\". Only Digby, tried on a separate indictment, pleaded guilty, insisting that the King had reneged upon promises of toleration for Catholics, and that affection for Catesby and love of the Catholic cause mitigated his actions. He sought death by the axe and begged mercy from the King for his young family. His defence was in vain; his arguments were rebuked by Coke and Northumberland, and along with his seven co-conspirators, he was found guilty by the jury of high treason. Digby shouted \"If I may but hear any of your lordships say, you forgive me, I shall go more cheerfully to the gallows.\" The response was short: \"God forgive you, and we do.\"\n\nGarnet may have been questioned on as many as 23 occasions. His response to the threat of the rack was \"\"Minare ista pueris\" [Threats are only for boys]\", and he denied having encouraged Catholics to pray for the success of the \"Catholic Cause\". His interrogators resorted to the forgery of correspondence between Garnet and other Catholics, but to no avail. His jailers then allowed him to talk with another priest in a neighbouring cell, with eavesdroppers listening to every word. Eventually Garnet let slip a crucial piece of information, that there was only one man who could testify that he had any knowledge of the plot. Under torture Garnet admitted that he had heard of the plot from fellow Jesuit Oswald Tesimond, who had learnt of it in confession from Catesby. Garnet was charged with high treason and tried in the Guildhall on 28 March, in a trial lasting from 8 am until 7 pm. According to Coke, Garnet instigated the plot: \"[Garnet] hath many gifts and endowments of nature, by art learned, a good linguist and, by profession, a Jesuit and a Superior as indeed he is Superior to all his predecessors in devilish treason, a Doctor of Dissimulation, Deposing of Princes, Disposing of Kingdoms, Daunting and deterring of subjects, and Destruction.\" Garnet refuted all the charges against him, and explained the Catholic position on such matters, but he was nevertheless found guilty and sentenced to death.\n\nAlthough Catesby and Percy escaped the executioner, their bodies were exhumed and decapitated, and their heads exhibited on spikes outside the House of Lords. On a cold 30 January, Everard Digby, Robert Wintour, John Grant, and Thomas Bates, were tied to hurdles—wooden panels—and dragged through the crowded streets of London to St Paul's Churchyard. Digby, the first to mount the scaffold, asked the spectators for forgiveness, and refused the attentions of a Protestant clergyman. He was stripped of his clothing, and wearing only a shirt, climbed the ladder to place his head through the noose. He was quickly cut down, and while still fully conscious was castrated, disembowelled, and then quartered, along with the three other prisoners. The following day, Thomas Wintour, Ambrose Rookwood, Robert Keyes, and Guy Fawkes were hanged, drawn and quartered, opposite the building they had planned to blow up, in the Old Palace Yard at Westminster. Keyes did not wait for the hangman's command and jumped from the gallows, but he survived the drop and was led to the quartering block. Although weakened by his torture, Fawkes managed to jump from the gallows and break his neck, thus avoiding the agony of the gruesome latter part of his execution.\n\nSteven Littleton was executed at Stafford. His cousin Humphrey, despite his cooperation with the authorities, met his end at Red Hill near Worcester. Henry Garnet's execution took place on 3 May 1606.\n\nGreater freedom for Roman Catholics to worship as they chose seemed unlikely in 1604, but the discovery of such a wide-ranging conspiracy, the capture of those involved, and the subsequent trials, led Parliament to consider introducing new anti-Catholic legislation. In the summer of 1606, laws against recusancy were strengthened; the Popish Recusants Act returned England to the Elizabethan system of fines and restrictions, introduced a sacramental test, and an Oath of Allegiance, requiring Catholics to abjure as a \"heresy\" the doctrine that \"princes excommunicated by the Pope could be deposed or assassinated\". Catholic Emancipation took another 200 years, but many important and loyal Catholics retained high office during King James I's reign. Although there was no \"golden time\" of \"toleration\" of Catholics, which Father Garnet had hoped for, James's reign was nevertheless a period of relative leniency for Catholics, and few were subject to prosecution.\n\nThe playwright William Shakespeare had already used the family history of Northumberland's family in his \"Henry IV\" series of plays, and the events of the Gunpowder Plot seem to have featured alongside the earlier Gowrie conspiracy in \"Macbeth\", written some time between 1603 and 1607. Interest in the demonic was heightened by the Gunpowder Plot. The King had become engaged in the great debate about other-worldly powers in writing his \"Daemonology\" in 1597, before he became King of England as well as Scotland. Inversions seen in such lines as \"fair is foul and foul is fair\" are used frequently, and another possible reference to the plot relates to the use of equivocation; Garnett's \"A Treatise of Equivocation\" was found on one of the plotters. Another writer influenced by the plot was John Milton, who in 1626 wrote what one commentator has called a \"critically vexing poem\", \"In Quintum Novembris\". Reflecting \"partisan public sentiment on an English-Protestant national holiday\", in the published editions of 1645 and 1673 the poem is preceded by five epigrams on the subject of the Gunpowder Plot, apparently written by Milton in preparation for the larger work. The plot may also have influenced his later work, \"Paradise Lost\".\nThe Gunpowder Plot was commemorated for years by special sermons and other public acts, such as the ringing of church bells. It added to an increasingly full calendar of Protestant celebrations that contributed to the national and religious life of 17th-century England, and has evolved into the Bonfire Night of today. In \"What If the Gunpowder Plot Had Succeeded?\" historian Ronald Hutton considered the events which might have followed a successful implementation of the plot, and the destruction of the House of Lords and all those within it. He concluded that a severe backlash against suspected Catholics would have followed, and that without foreign assistance a successful rebellion would have been unlikely; despite differing religious convictions, most Englishmen were loyal to the institution of the monarchy. England might have become a more \"Puritan absolute monarchy\", as \"existed in Sweden, Denmark, Saxony, and Prussia in the seventeenth century\", rather than following the path of parliamentary and civil reform that it did.\n\nMany at the time felt that Salisbury had been involved in the plot to gain favour with the King and enact more stridently anti-Catholic legislation. Such conspiracy theories alleged that Salisbury had either actually invented the plot or allowed it to continue when his agents had already infiltrated it, for the purposes of propaganda. The Popish Plot of 1678 sparked renewed interest in the Gunpowder Plot, resulting in a book by Thomas Barlow, Bishop of Lincoln, which refuted \"a bold and groundless surmise that all this was a contrivance of Secretary Cecil\".\n\nIn 1897 Father John Gerard of Stonyhurst College, namesake of John Gerard (who, following the plot's discovery, had evaded capture), wrote an account called \"What was the Gunpowder Plot?\", alleging Salisbury's culpability. This prompted a refutation later that year by Samuel Gardiner, who argued that Gerard had gone too far in trying to \"wipe away the reproach\" which the plot had exacted on generations of English Catholics. Gardiner portrayed Salisbury as guilty of nothing more than opportunism. Subsequent attempts to prove Salisbury's involvement, such as Francis Edwards's 1969 work \"Guy Fawkes: the real story of the gunpowder plot?\", have similarly foundered on the lack of any clear evidence.\n\nThe cellars under the Houses of Parliament continued to be leased out to private individuals until 1678, when news of the Popish Plot broke. It was then considered prudent to search the cellars on the day before each State Opening of Parliament, a ritual that survives to this day.\n\nIn January 1606, during the first sitting of Parliament since the plot, the Observance of 5th November Act 1605 was passed, making services and sermons commemorating the event an annual feature of English life; the act remained in force until 1859. The tradition of marking the day with the ringing of church bells and bonfires started soon after the Plot's discovery, and fireworks were included in some of the earliest celebrations. In Britain, the 5th of November is variously called Bonfire Night, Fireworks Night, or Guy Fawkes Night.\n\nIt remains the custom in Britain, on or around 5 November, to let off fireworks. Traditionally, in the weeks running up to the 5th, children made \"guys\"—effigies supposedly of Fawkes—usually made from old clothes stuffed with newspaper, and fitted with a grotesque mask, to be burnt on the 5 November bonfire. These guys were exhibited in the street to collect money for fireworks, although this custom has become less common. The word guy thus came in the 19th century to mean an oddly dressed person, and hence in the 20th and 21st centuries to mean any male person.\nNovember the 5th firework displays and bonfire parties are common throughout Britain, in major public displays and in private gardens. In some areas, particularly in Sussex, there are extensive processions, large bonfires and firework displays organised by local bonfire societies, the most elaborate of which take place in Lewes.\n\nAccording to the biographer Esther Forbes, the Guy Fawkes Day celebration in the pre-revolutionary American colonies was a very popular holiday. In Boston, the revelry took on anti-authoritarian overtones, and often became so dangerous that many would not venture out of their homes.\n\nIn the 2005 ITV programme \"\", a full-size replica of the House of Lords was built and destroyed with barrels of gunpowder. The experiment was conducted on the Advantica Spadeadam test site, and demonstrated that the explosion, if the gunpowder was in good order, would have killed all those in the building. The power of the explosion was such that the deep concrete walls (replicating how archives suggest the walls of the old House of Lords were constructed) were reduced to rubble. Measuring devices placed in the chamber to calculate the force of the blast were themselves destroyed by the explosion; the skull of the dummy representing King James, which had been placed on a throne inside the chamber surrounded by courtiers, peers and bishops, was found a considerable distance from the site. According to the findings of the programme, no one within of the blast could have survived, and all of the stained glass windows in Westminster Abbey would have been shattered, as would all of the windows in the vicinity of the Palace. The explosion would have been seen from miles away, and heard from further away still. Even if only half of the gunpowder had gone off, everyone in the House of Lords and its environs would have been killed instantly.\n\nThe programme also disproved claims that some deterioration in the quality of the gunpowder would have prevented the explosion. A portion of deliberately deteriorated gunpowder, of such low quality as to make it unusable in firearms, when placed in a heap and ignited, still managed to create a large explosion. The impact of even deteriorated gunpowder would have been magnified by its containment in wooden barrels, compensating for the quality of the contents. The compression would have created a cannon effect, with the powder first blowing up from the top of the barrel before, a millisecond later, blowing out. Calculations showed that Fawkes, who was skilled in the use of gunpowder, had deployed double the amount needed.\n\nSome of the gunpowder guarded by Fawkes may have survived. In March 2002 workers cataloguing archives of diarist John Evelyn at the British Library found a box containing a number of gunpowder samples, including a compressed bar with a note in Evelyn's handwriting stating that it had belonged to Guy Fawkes. A further note, written in the 19th century, confirmed this provenance, although in 1952 the document acquired a new comment: \"but there was none left!\"\n\n\nNotes\nFootnotes\nBibliography\n\n", "id": "13159", "title": "Gunpowder Plot"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13160", "text": "Gelatin\n\nGelatin or gelatine (from meaning \"stiff\", \"frozen\") is a translucent, colorless, brittle (when dry), flavorless food derived from collagen obtained from various animal raw materials. It is commonly used as a gelling agent in food, pharmaceutical drugs, photography, and cosmetic manufacturing. Substances containing gelatin or functioning in a similar way are called \"gelatinous\". Gelatin is an irreversibly hydrolyzed form of collagen, wherein the hydrolysis results in the reduction of protein fibrils into smaller peptides, which will have broad molecular weight ranges associated with physical and chemical methods of denaturation, based on the process of hydrolysis. It is found in most gummy candy, as well as other products such as marshmallows, gelatin desserts, and some ice creams, dips, and yogurts. Gelatin for recipe use comes in the form of sheets, granules, or powder. Instant types can be added to the food as they are; others need to be soaked in water beforehand.\n\nGelatin is a mixture of peptides and proteins produced by partial hydrolysis of collagen extracted from the skin, bones, and connective tissues of animals such as domesticated cattle, chicken, pigs, and fish. During hydrolysis, the natural molecular bonds between individual collagen strands are broken down into a form that rearranges more easily. Its chemical composition is, in many respects, closely similar to that of its parent collagen. Photographic and pharmaceutical grades of gelatin generally are sourced from beef bones and pig skin.\n\nGelatin readily dissolves in hot water and sets to a gel on cooling. When added directly to cold water, it does not dissolve well, however. Gelatin also is soluble in most polar solvents. Gelatin solutions show viscoelastic flow and streaming birefringence. Solubility is determined by the method of manufacture. Typically, gelatin can be dispersed in a relatively concentrated acid. Such dispersions are stable for 10–15 days with little or no chemical changes and are suitable for coating purposes or for extrusion into a precipitating bath.\n\nThe mechanical properties of gelatin gels are very sensitive to temperature variations, the previous thermal history of the gels, and the amount of time elapsing. These gels exist over only a small temperature range, the upper limit being the melting point of the gel, which depends on gelatin grade and concentration, but typically, is less than and the lower limit the freezing point at which ice crystallizes. The upper melting point is below human body temperature, a factor that is important for mouthfeel of foods produced with gelatin. The viscosity of the gelatin-water mixture is greatest when the gelatin concentration is high and the mixture is kept cool at about . The gel strength is quantified using the Bloom test.\n\nThe worldwide production amount of gelatin is about . On a commercial scale, gelatin is made from by-products of the meat and leather industries. Recently, fish by-products also have been considered suitable because they eliminate some of the religious obstacles surrounding gelatin consumption.\nGelatin is derived from pork skins, pork, and cattle bones, or split cattle hides. The raw materials are prepared by different curing, acid, and alkali processes that are employed to extract the dried collagen hydrolysate. These processes may take several weeks, and differences in such processes have great effects on the properties of the final gelatin products.\n\nGelatin also can be prepared in the home. Boiling certain cartilaginous cuts of meat or bones results in gelatin being dissolved into the water. Depending on the concentration, the resulting stock (when cooled) will form a jelly or gel naturally. This process is used for aspic.\n\nWhile many processes exist whereby collagen may be converted to gelatin, they all have several factors in common. The intermolecular and intramolecular bonds that stabilize insoluble collagen must be broken, and also, the hydrogen bonds that stabilize the collagen helix must be broken. The manufacturing processes of gelatin consists of three main stages:\n\n\nIf the raw material used in the production of the gelatin is derived from bones, dilute acid solutions are used to remove calcium and other salts. Hot water or several solvents may be used to reduce the fat content, which should not exceed 1% before the main extraction step. If the raw material consists of hides and skin; size reduction, washing, removal of hair from hides, and degreasing are necessary to prepare the hides and skins for the main extraction step.\n\nCollagen hydrolysis is performed by one of three different methods: acid-, alkali-, and enzymatic hydrolysis. Acid treatment is especially suitable for less fully crosslinked materials such as pig skin collagen and normally requires 10 to 48 hours. Alkali treatment is suitable for more complex collagen such as that found in bovine hides and requires more time, normally several weeks. The purpose of the alkali treatment is to destroy certain chemical crosslinks still present in collagen. Within the gelatin industry, the gelatin obtained from acid-treated raw material has been called type-A gelatin and the gelatin obtained from alkali-treated raw material is referred to as type-B gelatin.\n\nAdvances are occurring to optimize the yield of gelatin using enzymatic hydrolysis of collagen. The treatment time is shorter than that required for alkali treatment, however, and results in almost complete conversion to the pure product. The physical properties of the final gelatin product are considered better.\n\nAfter preparation of the raw material, i.e., reducing cross-links between collagen components and removing some of the impurities such as fat and salts, partially purified collagen is converted into gelatin by extraction with either water or acid solutions at appropriate temperatures. All industrial processes are based on neutral or acid pH values because although alkali treatments speed up conversion, they also promote degradation processes. Acidic extraction conditions are extensively used in the industry, but the degree of acid varies with different processes. This extraction step is a multistage process, and the extraction temperature usually is increased in later extraction steps, which ensures minimum thermal degradation of the extracted gelatin.\n\nThis process includes several steps such as filtration, evaporation, drying, grinding, and sifting. These operations are concentration-dependent and also dependent on the particular gelatin used. Gelatin degradation should be avoided and minimized, so the lowest temperature possible is used for the recovery process. Most recoveries are rapid, with all of the processes being done in several stages to avoid extensive deterioration of the peptide structure. A deteriorated peptide structure would result in a low gel strength, which is not generally desired.\n\nThe first use of gelatin in foods is attributed to Medieval Britain (1400s) when cattle hooves were boiled to produce a gel. Further commercial development occurred in 1754 when a British manufacturing patent was issued. Food applications in the USA and France during 1800–1900 appear to have established the versatility of gelatin, including the origin of its popularity in the USA as Jell-O. Over middle-late 1800s, Charles and Rose Knox of New York manufactured and marketed gelatin powder, diversifying the appeal and applications of gelatin.\n\nProbably best known as a gelling agent in cooking, different types and grades of gelatin are used in a wide range of food and nonfood products:\ncommon examples of foods that contain gelatin are gelatin desserts, trifles, aspic, marshmallows, candy corn, and confections such as Peeps, gummy bears, fruit snacks, and jelly babies. Gelatin may be used as a stabilizer, thickener, or texturizer in foods such as yogurt, cream cheese, and margarine; it is used, as well, in fat-reduced foods to simulate the mouthfeel of fat and to create volume. It also is used in the production of several types of Chinese soup dumplings, specifically Shanghainese soup dumplings, or \"xiaolongbao\", as well as \"Shengjian mantou\", a type of fried and steamed dumpling. The fillings of both are made by combining ground pork with gelatin cubes, and in the process of cooking, the gelatin melts, creating a soupy interior with a characteristic gelatinous stickiness.\n\nGelatin is used for the clarification of juices, such as apple juice, and of vinegar. \n\nIsinglass, from the swim bladders of fish, is still used as a fining agent for wine and beer. Besides hartshorn jelly, from deer antlers (hence the name \"hartshorn\"), isinglass was one of the oldest sources of gelatin.\n\n\nThe consumption of gelatin from particular animals may be forbidden by religious rules or cultural taboos. For example, Jewish kosher and Islamic halal customs require gelatin from sources other than pigs, such as cattle or fish, and from animals slaughtered ritually. Roma people are cautious of gelatin products that may have been made from horses, as their culture forbids the consumption of horses. Some companies specify the source of the gelatin used. Vegans and many vegetarians choose not to eat foods containing gelatin made from animals. Likewise, Hindu and Jain customs may require gelatin alternatives from sources other than animals, as many Hindus are vegetarian. Hindus who are not vegetarians often consume gelatin from all sources except cattle, which are considered sacred. Since many people are not aware about gelatin's sources, however, they unknowingly consume it. Other people simply consider gelatin unpalatable due to the ingredients used in its production.\n\nPartial alternatives to gelatins derived from animals include the seaweed extracts agar and carrageenan, as well as pectin and konjac. Research into synthetic collagen is ongoing; as of 2011, partial success has been achieved in replicating collagen's structure using self-assembling peptides.\n\nAlthough gelatin is 98–99% protein by dry weight, it has little additional nutritional value, varying according to the source of the raw material and processing technique.\n\nSince 1997, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), with support from the TSE (transmissible spongiform encephalopathy) Advisory Committee, has been monitoring the potential risk of transmitting animal diseases, especially bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), commonly known as mad cow disease. The FDA study concluded: \"...steps such as heat, alkaline treatment, and filtration could be effective in reducing the level of contaminating TSE agents; however, scientific evidence is insufficient at this time to demonstrate that these treatments would effectively remove the BSE infectious agent if present in the source material.\"\n\nThe Scientific Steering Committee (SSC) of the European Union in 2003 stated that the risk associated with bovine bone gelatin is very low or zero.\nIn 2006, the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) stated that the SSC opinion was confirmed, that the BSE risk of bone-derived gelatin was very small, and removed support for the 2003 request to exclude the skull and vertebrae of bovine origin older than 12 months from the material used in gelatin manufacturing.\n\nToday, all reputable gelatin manufacturers follow the Quality Management System according to ISO 9001. In this way, all process steps are documented. For pharmaceutical-grade gelatins, strict regulations from the FDA, the European CPMP, and European Pharmacopoeia must be met. A detailed overview of the regulatory requirements for gelatin production may be found in the \"Gelatine Handbook\", pp. 99–101.\n\nIn 2011, reviewing the clinical data that had been published to date, the European Food Safety Authority Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition, and Allergies concluded that \"a cause and effect relationship has not been established between the consumption of collagen hydrolysate and maintenance of joints\". A 2012 review also found insufficient evidence to support its use for osteoarthritis. \n\nNonetheless, in 2013, Health Canada approved a label for \"hydrolyzed collagen\" specifying that the label may say that it is useful to supplement dietary amino acid intake and, that it \"helps to reduce joint pain associated with osteoarthritis.\"\n", "id": "13160", "title": "Gelatin"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13162", "text": "Gelatin dessert\n\nGelatin desserts or jellies are desserts made with sweetened and flavored gelatin. This kind of dessert is first recorded by Hannah Glasse in her 18th century book \"The Art of Cookery\".\n\nThey can be made by combining plain gelatin with other ingredients or by using a premixed blend of gelatin with additives. Fully prepared gelatin desserts are sold in a variety of forms, ranging from large decorative shapes to individual serving cups.\n\nBefore gelatin became widely available as a commercial product, the most typical gelatin dessert was \"calf's foot jelly\". As the name indicates, this was made by extracting and purifying gelatin from the foot of a calf. This gelatin was used for savory dishes in aspic, or was mixed with fruit juice and sugar for a dessert.\n\nIn the eighteenth century, gelatin from calf's feet, isinglass and hartshorn was colored blue with violet juice, yellow with saffron, red with cochineal and green with spinach and allowed to set in layers in small, narrow glasses. It was flavored with sugar, lemon juice and mixed spices. This preparation was called \"jelly\"; Hannah Glasse was the first to record the use of this jelly in trifle in her book \"The Art of Cookery\", first published in 1747.\n\nTo make a gelatin dessert, gelatin is dissolved in hot liquid with the desired flavors and other additives. These latter ingredients usually include sugar, fruit juice, or sugar substitutes; they may be added and varied during preparation, or pre-mixed with the gelatin in a commercial product which merely requires the addition of hot water.\n\nIn addition to sweeteners, the prepared commercial blends generally contain flavoring agents and other additives, such as adipic acid, fumaric acid, sodium citrate, and artificial flavorings and food colors. Because the collagen is processed extensively, the final product is not categorized as a meat or animal product by the US federal government.\n\nPrepared commercial blends may be sold as a powder or as a concentrated gelatinous block, divided into small squares. Either type is mixed with sufficient hot water to completely dissolve it, and then mixed with enough cold water to make the volume of liquid specified on the packet.\n\nThe solubility of powdered gelatin can be enhanced by sprinkling it into the liquid several minutes before heating, \"blooming\" the individual granules. The fully dissolved mixture is then refrigerated, slowly forming a colloidal gel as it cools.\n\nGelatin desserts may be enhanced in many ways, such as using decorative molds, creating multicolored layers by adding a new layer of slightly cooled liquid over the previously-solidified one, or suspending non-soluble edible elements such as marshmallows or fruit. Some types of fresh fruit and their unprocessed juices are incompatible with gelatin desserts; see the Chemistry section below.\n\nWhen fully chilled, the most common ratios of gelatin to liquid (as instructed on commercial packaging) usually result in a custard-like texture which can retain detailed shapes when cold but melts back to a viscous liquid when warm. A recipe calling for the addition of additional gelatin to regular jelly gives a rubbery product that can be cut into shapes with cookie cutters and eaten with fingers (called \"Knox Blox\" by the Knox company, makers of unflavored gelatin). Higher gelatin ratios can be used to increase the stability of the gel, culminating in gummy candies which remain rubbery solids at room temperature (see Bloom (test)).\n\nThe Bloom Strength of a gelatin mixture is the measure of how strong it is. It is defined by the force in grams required to press a 12.5 mm diameter plunger 4 mm into 112 g of a standard 6.67% w/v gelatin gel at 10 °C. The Bloom Strength of a gel is useful to know when determining the possibility of substituting a gelatin of one Bloom Strength for a gelatin of another. One can use the following equation:\n\nC x B = k\n\nor C(B)÷(B) = C\n\nWhere C = concentration, B = Bloom strength and k = constant. For example, when making gummies, it's important to know that a 250 Bloom gelatin has a much shorter (more thick) texture than a 180 Bloom gelatin.\n\nA gelatin shot (usually called a Jell-O shot in North America and vodka jelly or jelly shot in the UK and Australia) is a shooter in which liquor, usually vodka, rum, tequila, or neutral grain spirit, replaces some of the water or fruit juice that is used to congeal the gel.\n\nThe American satirist and mathematician Tom Lehrer claims to have invented the gelatin shot in the 1950s while working for the National Security Agency, where he developed vodka gelatin as a way to circumvent a restriction of alcoholic beverages on base. An early published recipe for an alcoholic gelatin drink dates from 1862, found in \"How to Mix Drinks, or The Bon Vivant's Companion\" by Jerry Thomas: his recipe for \"Punch Jelly\" calls for the addition of isinglass or other gelatin to a punch made from cognac, rum, and lemon juice.\n\nOther culinary gelling agents can be used instead of animal-derived gelatin. These plant-derived substances are more similar to pectin and other gelling plant carbohydrates than to gelatin proteins; their physical properties are slightly different, creating different constraints for the preparation and storage conditions. These other gelling agents may also be preferred for certain traditional cuisines or dietary restrictions.\n\nAgar, a product made from red algae, is the traditional gelling agent in many Asian desserts. Agar is a popular gelatin substitute in quick jelly powder mix and prepared dessert gels that can be stored at room temperature. Compared to gelatin, agar preparations require a higher dissolving temperature, but the resulting gels congeal more quickly and remain solid at higher temperatures, , as opposed to for gelatin. Vegans and vegetarians can use agar to replace animal-derived gelatin.\n\nCarrageenan is also derived from seaweed, and lacks agar's occasionally unpleasant smell during cooking. It sets more firmly than agar and is often used in kosher and halal cooking.\n\nKonjac is a gelling agent used in many Asian foods, including the popular konnyaku fruit jelly candies.\n\nGelatin consists of partially hydrolyzed collagen, a protein which is highly abundant in animal tissues such as bone and skin. Collagen is a protein made up of three strands of polypeptide chains that form in a helical structure. To make a gelatin dessert, such as Jello, the collagen is mixed with water and heated, disrupting the bonds that hold the three strands of polypeptides together. As the gelatin cools, these bonds try to reform in the same structure as before, but now with small bubbles of liquid in between. This gives gelatin its semisolid, gel-like texture.\n\nBecause gelatin is a protein that contains both acid and base amino groups, it acts as an amphoteric molecule, displaying both acidic and basic properties. This allows it to react with different compounds, such as sugars and other food additives. These interactions give gelatin a versatile nature in the roles that it plays in different foods. It can stabilize foams in foods such as marshmallows, it can help maintain small ice crystals in ice cream, and it can even serve as an emulsifier for foods like toffee and margarine.\n\nAlthough many gelatin desserts incorporate fruit, some fresh fruits contain proteolytic enzymes; these enzymes cut the gelatin molecule into peptides (protein fragments) too small to form a firm gel. The use of such fresh fruits in a gelatin recipe results in a dessert that never \"sets\".\n\nSpecifically, pineapple contains the protease (protein cutting enzyme) bromelain, kiwi fruit contains actinidin, figs contain ficain, and papaya contains papain. Cooking or canning denatures and deactivates the proteases, so canned pineapple, for example, works fine in a gelatin dessert.\n\nAlthough eating tainted beef can lead to New Variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (the human variant of mad-cow disease, bovine spongiform encephalopathy), there is no known case of BSE having been transmitted through collagen products such as gelatin.\n\nIn many of the Commonwealth nations including Canada and in Ireland, gelatin desserts are called jelly. In the United States, gelatin desserts are sometimes called jello or gelatin, whereas jelly is a fruit preserve.\n\nPopular brands of premixed gelatin include Aeroplane Jelly in Australia, Hartley's (formerly Rowntree's) in the United Kingdom, and Jell-O from Kraft Foods and Royal from Jel Sert in North America.\n\n\n", "id": "13162", "title": "Gelatin dessert"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13168", "text": "George, Duke of Saxony\n\nGeorge \"the Bearded\", Duke of Saxony (Meissen, 27 August 1471 – Dresden, 17 April 1539), was duke of Saxony from 1500 to 1539.\n\nDuke George was a member of the Order of the Golden Fleece.\n\nHis father was Albert the Brave of Saxony, founder of the Albertine line of the Wettin family, his mother was Sidonie, daughter of George Podiebrad, King of Bohemia. Elector Frederick the Wise, a member of the Ernestine branch of the same family, known for his protection of Luther, was a cousin of Duke George.\n\nGeorge, as the eldest son, received an excellent training in theology and other branches of learning, and was thus much better educated than most of the princes of his day.\n\nAs early as 1488, when his father was in East Frisia fighting on behalf of the emperor, George was regent of the ducal possessions, which included the Margraviate of Meissen with the cities of Dresden and Leipzig.\n\nGeorge was married at Dresden, on 21 November 1496, to Barbara Jagiellon, daughter of Casimir IV, King of Poland and Elisabeth, daughter of Albrecht II of Hungary. They had ten children, but all, with the exception of a daughter, died before their father:\n\n\nIn 1498, the emperor granted Albert the Brave the hereditary governorship of Friesland. At Maastricht, 14 February 1499, Albert settled the succession to his possessions, and endeavoured by this arrangement to prevent further partition of his domain. He died 12 September 1500, and was succeeded in his German territories by George as the head of the Albertine line, while George's brother Heinrich became hereditary governor of Friesland.\n\nThe Saxon occupation of Friesland, however, was by no means secure and was the source of constant revolts in that province. Consequently, Heinrich, who was of a rather inert disposition, relinquished his claims to the governorship, and in 1505 an agreement was made between the brothers by which Friesland was transferred to George, while Heinrich received an annuity and the districts of Freiberg and Wolkenstein. But this arrangement did not restore peace in Friesland, which remained a source of trouble to Saxony. In 1515 George sold Friesland to the future Emperor Charles V (then Duke of Burgundy) for the very moderate price of 100,000 florins. He tried tot keep the newmade lands of het Bildt which weren't granted him by Charles V. These troubles outside of his Saxon possessions did not prevent George from bestowing much care on the government of the ducal territory proper. When regent, during the lifetime of his father, the difficulties arising from conflicting interests and the large demands on his powers had often brought the young prince to the verge of despair.\n\nIn a short time, however, he developed decided ability as a ruler; on entering upon his inheritance he divided the duchy into governmental districts, took measures to suppress the robber-knights, and regulated the judicial system by defining and readjusting the jurisdiction of the various law courts. In his desire to achieve good order, severity, and the amelioration of the condition of the people, he sometimes ventured to infringe even on the rights of the cities. His court was better regulated than that of any other German prince, and he bestowed a paternal care on the University of Leipzig, where a number of reforms were introduced, and Humanism, as opposed to Scholasticism, was encouraged.\n\nFrom the beginning of the Reformation in 1517, Duke George directed his energies chiefly to ecclesiastical affairs. Hardly one of the secular German princes held as firmly as he to the Church, he defended its rights and vigorously condemned every innovation except those countenanced by the highest ecclesiastical authorities. At first he was not opposed to Luther, but as time went on and Luther's aim became clear to him, he turned more and more from the Reformer, and was finally, in consequence of this change of attitude, drawn into an acrimonious correspondence in which Luther, according to some without any justification, heavily criticized the duke.\n\nThe duke was not blind to the undeniable abuses existing at that time in the Church. In 1519, despite the opposition of the theological faculty of the university, he originated the Disputation of Leipzig, with the idea of helping forward the cause of truth, and was present at all the discussions. In 1521, at the Diet of Worms, when the German princes handed in a paper containing a list of \"grievances\" concerning the condition of the Church, George added for himself twelve specific complaints referring mainly to the abuse of Indulgences and the annates.\n\nIn 1525, he combined with his Lutheran son-in-law, Landgrave Philip of Hesse, and his cousin, the Elector Frederick the Wise, to suppress the revolt of the peasants, who were defeated near Frankenhausen in Thuringia. Some years later, he wrote a forcible preface to a translation of the New Testament issued at his command by his private secretary, Hieronymus Emser, as an offset to Luther's version. Lutheran books were confiscated by his order, wherever found, though he refunded the cost of the books. He proved himself in every way a vigorous opponent of the Lutherans, decreeing that Christian burial was to be refused to apostates, and recreant ecclesiastics were to be delivered to the bishop of Merseburg.\n\nFor those, however, who merely held anti-catholic opinions, the punishment was only expulsion from the duchy. The duke deeply regretted the constant postponement of the ardently desired council, from the action of which so much was expected. While awaiting its convocation, he thought to remove the more serious defects by a reform of the monasteries, which had become exceedingly worldly in spirit and from which many of the inmates were departing. He vainly sought to obtain from the Curia the right, which was sometimes granted by Rome, to make official visitations to the conventual institutions of his realm. His reforms were confined mainly to uniting the almost vacant monasteries and to matters of economic management, the control of the property being entrusted in most cases to the secular authorities.\n\nIn 1525, Duke George formed, with some other German rulers, the League of Dessau, for the protection of Catholic interests. In the same way he was the animating spirit of the League of Halle, formed in 1533, from which sprang in 1538 the Holy League of Nuremberg for the maintenance of the religious Peace of Nuremberg.\n\nThe vigorous activity displayed by the duke in so many directions was not attended with much success. Most of his political measures, indeed, stood the test of experience, but in ecclesiastico-political matters he witnessed with sorrow the gradual decline of Catholicism and the spread of Lutheranism within his dominions, in spite of his earnest efforts and forcible prohibition of the new doctrine. Furthermore, during George's lifetime his nearest relations his son-in-law Philip of Hesse, and his brother Heinrich, joined the Reformers.\n\nHe spent the last years of his reign in endeavours to secure a Catholic successor, thinking by this step to check the dissemination of Lutheran opinions. The only one of George's sons then living was the weak-minded and unmarried Frederick. The intention of his father was that Frederick should rule with the aid of a council. Early in 1539, Frederick was married to Elizabeth of Mansfeld, but he died shortly afterwards, leaving no prospect of an heir. According to the act of settlement of 1499, George's Protestant brother Heinrich was now heir prospective; but George, disregarding his father's will, sought to disinherit his brother and to bequeath the duchy to Ferdinand, brother of Charles V. His sudden death prevented the carrying out of this intention.\n\nGeorge was an excellent and industrious ruler, self-sacrificing, high-minded, and unwearying in the furtherance of the highest interests of his land and people. As a man he was upright, vigorous and energetic, if somewhat irascible. A far-seeing and faithful adherent of the emperor and empire, he accomplished much for his domain by economy, love of order and wise direction of activities of his state officials. The grief of his life was Luther's Reformation and what he regarded to be apostasy from the Old Faith. Of a strictly religious, although not narrow, disposition, he sought at any cost to keep his subjects from falling away from the Church, but his methods of attaining his object were not always free from reproach.\n\n\n", "id": "13168", "title": "George, Duke of Saxony"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13169", "text": "Gneiss\n\nGneiss () is a common distributed type of rock formed by high-grade regional metamorphic processes from pre-existing formations that were originally either igneous or sedimentary rocks. It is often foliated (composed of layers of sheet-like planar structures). The foliations are characterized by alternating darker and lighter colored bands, called \"gneissic banding\".\n\nThe word \"gneiss\" comes from the Middle High German verb (to spark; so called because the rock glitters). It has occurred in English since at least 1757.\n\nGneissic rocks are usually medium- to coarse-foliated; they are largely recrystallized but do not carry large quantities of micas, chlorite or other platy minerals. Gneisses that are metamorphosed igneous rocks or their equivalent are termed granite gneisses, diorite gneisses, etc. Gneiss rocks may also be named after a characteristic component such as garnet gneiss, biotite gneiss, albite gneiss, etc. \"Orthogneiss\" designates a gneiss derived from an igneous rock, and \"paragneiss\" is one from a sedimentary rock.\n\n\"Gneissose\" rocks have properties similar to gneiss.\n\nGneiss appears to be striped in bands, called \"gneissic banding\". The banding is developed under high temperature and pressure conditions.\n\nThe minerals are arranged into layers that appear as bands in cross section. The appearance of layers, called \"compositional banding\", occurs because the layers, or bands, are of different composition. The darker bands have relatively more mafic minerals (those containing more magnesium and iron). The lighter bands contain relatively more felsic (silicate minerals, containing more of the lighter elements, such as silicon, oxygen, aluminium, sodium, and potassium).\n\nA common cause of the banding is the subjection of the protolith (the original rock material that undergoes metamorphism) to extreme shearing force, a sliding force similar to the pushing of the top of a deck of cards in one direction, and the bottom of the deck in the other direction. These forces stretch out the rock like a plastic, and the original material is spread out into sheets.\n\nSome banding is formed from original rock material (protolith) that is subjected to extreme temperature and pressure and is composed of alternating layers of sandstone (lighter) and shale (darker), which is metamorphosed into bands of quartzite and mica.\n\nAnother cause of banding is \"metamorphic differentiation\", which separates different materials into different layers through chemical reactions, a process not fully understood.\n\nNot all gneiss rocks have detectable banding. In kyanite gneiss, crystals of kyanite appear as random clumps in what is mainly a plagioclase (albite) matrix.\n\nAugen gneiss, from the , meaning \"eyes\", is a coarse-grained gneiss resulting from metamorphism of granite, which contains characteristic elliptic or lenticular shear-bound feldspar porphyroclasts, normally microcline, within the layering of the quartz, biotite and magnetite bands.\n\nHenderson gneiss is found in North Carolina and South Carolina, US, east of the Brevard Shear Zone. It has deformed into two sequential forms. The second, more warped, form is associated with the Brevard Fault, and the first deformation results from displacement to the southwest.\n\nMost of the Outer Hebrides of Scotland have a bedrock formed from Lewisian gneiss. In addition to the Outer Hebrides, they form basement deposits on the Scottish mainland west of the Moine Thrust and on the islands of Coll and Tiree. These rocks are largely igneous in origin, mixed with metamorphosed marble, quartzite and mica schist with later intrusions of basaltic dikes and granite magma.\n\nGneisses of Archean and Proterozoic age occur in the Baltic Shield.\n\nIn antiquity, gneisses were also utilized in architectural construction. They were used to erect the Sphinx of Taharqo in the Nile Valley.\n\n\n\n", "id": "13169", "title": "Gneiss"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13171", "text": "Gro Harlem Brundtland\n\nGro Harlem Brundtland (; born Gro Harlem, 20 April 1939) is a Norwegian politician, who served three terms as Prime Minister of Norway (1981, 1986–89, and 1990–96) and as Director-General of the World Health Organization from 1998 to 2003. She is also known for having chaired the Brundtland Commission which presented the Brundtland Report on sustainable development.\n\nEducated as a physician, Brundtland joined the Labour Party and entered the government in 1974 as Minister of the Environment. From 1981 to 1992 she was leader of the Labour Party. After her surprise resignation as Prime Minister in 1996, she became an international leader in sustainable development and public health, and served as Director-General of the World Health Organization and as a UN Special Envoy on Climate Change from 2007. She is also deputy chair of The Elders and a former Vice-President of the Socialist International. Brundtland received the 1994 Charlemagne Prize, and has received many other awards and recognitions.\n\nBrundtland was born in Oslo in 1939, the daughter of physician and politician Gudmund Harlem.\n\nIn 1963, Brundtland graduated with a medical degree, a cand.med. from the University of Oslo. She took her master's degree at Harvard University in 1965, as a Master of Public Health.\n\nFrom 1966 to 1969, she worked as a physician at the Directorate of Health (\"Helsedirektoratet\"), and from 1969 she worked as a doctor in Oslo's public school health service.\n\nShe was Norwegian Minister for Environmental Affairs from 1974 to 1979.\n\nBrundtland became Norway's first female Prime Minister in 1981. She served as Prime Minister from February to October.\nBrundtland became Norwegian Prime Minister for two further, and more durable, terms. The second ministry was from 9 May 1986 until 16 October 1989 and this cabinet became known worldwide for its high proportion of female ministers: nearly half, or eight of the total eighteen ministers, were female. The third ministry was from 3 November 1990 to 25 October 1996.\n\nBrundtland became leader of the Labour Party in 1981 and held the office until resigning in 1992, during her third term as Prime Minister. In 1996, she resigned as Prime Minister and retired completely from Norwegian politics. Her successor as both Labour Party leader in 1992 and as Prime Minister in 1996 was Thorbjørn Jagland.\n\nIn 1983, Brundtland was invited by then United Nations Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar to establish and chair the World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED), widely referred to as the Brundtland Commission. She developed the broad political concept of sustainable development in the course of extensive public hearings, that were distinguished by their inclusiveness. The commission, which published its report, \"Our Common Future\", in April 1987, provided the momentum for the 1992 Earth Summit/UNCED, which was headed by Maurice Strong, who had been a prominent member of the commission. The Brundtland Commission also provided momentum for Agenda 21.\n\nDuring her third ministry, the Norwegian government in 1993 took the initiative to sponsor secret peace talks between the Government of Israel led by Yitzchak Rabin - like Brundtland, leader of a Labour Party - and the PLO led by Yasser Arafat. This culminated with the signing of the Oslo Accords. For several years afterwards Norway continued to have a high-profile involvement in promoting Israeli-Palestinian peace, though increasingly displaced by the United States from its role as the mediator.\n\nAfter the end of her term as PM, Brundtland was then elected Director-General of the World Health Organization in May 1998. In this capacity, Brundtland adopted a far-reaching approach to public health, establishing a Commission on Macroeconomics and Health, chaired by Jeffrey Sachs, and addressing violence as a major public health issue. Brundtland spearheaded the movement, now worldwide, to achieve the abolition of cigarette smoking by education, persuasion, and increased taxation. Under her leadership, the World Health Organization was one of the first major employers to make quitting smoking a condition of employment.\n\nBrundtland was recognized in 2003 by \"Scientific American\" as their 'Policy Leader of the Year' for coordinating a rapid worldwide response to stem outbreaks of SARS. Brundtland was succeeded on 21 July 2003 by Jong-Wook Lee. In 1994, Brundtland was awarded the Charlemagne Prize of the city of Aachen.\n\nIn 2006 Brundtland was a member of the Panel of Eminent Persons who reviewed the work of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). In May 2007, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon named Brundtland, as well as Ricardo Lagos (the former president of Chile), and Han Seung-soo (the former foreign minister of South Korea), to serve as UN Special Envoys for Climate Change.\n\nBrundtland's hallmark political activities have been chronicled by her husband, Arne Olav Brundtland, in his two bestsellers, \"Married to Gro\" (ISBN 82-516-1647-6) and \"Still married to Gro\" (ISBN 82-05-30726-1).\n\nIn 2007, Bruntland was working for Pepsi as a consultant.\n\nGro Harlem Brundtland is a member of the Council of Women World Leaders, an international network of current and former women presidents and prime ministers whose mission is to mobilize collective action on issues of critical importance to women and equitable development.\n\nBrundtland is also a member of the Club of Madrid, an independent organization of former leaders of democratic states, which works to strengthen democratic governance and leadership.\n\nBrundtland serves as Deputy Chair of The Elders, a group of world leaders convened by Nelson Mandela, Graça Machel and Desmond Tutu in order to tackle some of the world's toughest problems. Mandela announced the launch of the group on 18 July 2007 in Johannesburg, South Africa. Brundtland has been active in The Elders’ work, participating in a broad range of the group’s initiatives. She has travelled with Elders delegations to Cyprus, the Korean Peninsula, Ethiopia, India and the Middle East. Brundtland has also been involved in The Elders’ initiative on child marriage, including the founding of \"Girls Not Brides: The Global Partnership to End Child Marriage\".\n\nBrundtland has attended the Bilderberg meetings.\n\nBrundtland narrowly escaped assassination by Anders Behring Breivik on 22 July 2011. She had been on the island of Utøya hours before the massacre there to give a speech to the AUF camp; Breivik stated that he originally intended Brundtland to be the main target of the attack (along with Eskil Pedersen and Jonas Gahr Støre), but he had been delayed while travelling from Oslo. Breivik arrived on Utøya about two hours after Brundtland had left.\n\nDuring his trial in 2012, Breivik revealed detailed assassination plans for Brundtland. He told the court that he had planned to handcuff her and then record himself reading out a prepared text detailing her \"crimes\", before decapitating her on camera using a bayonet and uploading the footage to the internet. Breivik said that while Brundtland had been his main target, he had still planned to massacre everyone else on the island.\n\nShe married Arne Olav Brundtland on 9 December 1960. They had four children; one is now deceased. They own a house in the south of France.\n\nBrundtland was operated on for uterine cancer in 2002 at Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål. In 2008 it became known that during 2007 she had received two treatments at Ullevål, paid for by Norwegian public expenditures. Since she had previously notified the Norwegian authorities that she had changed residence to France, she was no longer entitled to Norwegian social security benefits. Following media attention surrounding the matter, Brundtland decided to change residence once more, back to Norway, and she also announced that she would be paying for the treatments herself. Brundtland has claimed to suffer from electrical sensitivity which causes headaches when someone uses a mobile phone near her.\n\nBrundtland has received many awards and honours, including\n\n\n", "id": "13171", "title": "Gro Harlem Brundtland"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13172", "text": "Gregory of Nazianzus\n\nGregory of Nazianzus ( \"Grēgorios ho Nazianzēnos\"; c. 329 – 25 January 390), also known as Gregory the Theologian or Gregory Nazianzen, was a 4th-century Archbishop of Constantinople, and theologian. He is widely considered the most accomplished rhetorical stylist of the patristic age. As a classically trained orator and philosopher he infused Hellenism into the early church, establishing the paradigm of Byzantine theologians and church officials.\n\nGregory made a significant impact on the shape of Trinitarian theology among both Greek- and Latin-speaking theologians, and he is remembered as the \"Trinitarian Theologian\". Much of his theological work continues to influence modern theologians, especially in regard to the relationship among the three Persons of the Trinity. Along with the brothers Basil the Great and Gregory of Nyssa, he is known as one of the Cappadocian Fathers.\n\nGregory is a saint in both Eastern and Western Christianity. In the Roman Catholic Church he is numbered among the Doctors of the Church; in Eastern Orthodoxy and the Eastern Catholic Churches he is revered as one of the Three Holy Hierarchs, along with Basil the Great and John Chrysostom.\n\nHe is also one of only three men in the life of the Orthodox Church who have been officially designated \"Theologian\" by epithet, the other two being St. John the Theologian (the Evangelist), and St. Symeon the New Theologian.\n\nGregory was born of Greek parentage in the family estate of Karbala outside the village of Arianzus, near Nazianzus, in southwest Cappadocia. His parents, Gregory and Nonna, were wealthy land-owners. In AD 325 Nonna converted her husband, a Hypsistarian, to Christianity; he was subsequently ordained as bishop of Nazianzus in 328 or 329. The young Gregory and his brother, Caesarius, first studied at home with their uncle Amphylokhios. Gregory went on to study advanced rhetoric and philosophy in Nazianzus, Caesarea, Alexandria and Athens. On the way to Athens his ship encountered a violent storm, and the terrified Gregory prayed to Christ that if He would deliver him, he would dedicate his life to His service. While at Athens, he developed a close friendship with his fellow student Basil of Caesarea and also made the acquaintance of Flavius Claudius Julianus, who would later become the emperor known as Julian the Apostate. In Athens, Gregory studied under the famous rhetoricians Himerius and Proaeresius. Upon finishing his education, he taught rhetoric in Athens for a short time.\n\nIn 361 Gregory returned to Nazianzus and was ordained a presbyter by his father, who wanted him to assist with caring for local Christians. The younger Gregory, who had been considering a monastic existence, resented his father's decision to force him to choose between priestly services and a solitary existence, calling it an \"act of tyranny\". Leaving home after a few days, he met his friend Basil at Annesoi, where the two lived as ascetics. However, Basil urged him to return home to assist his father, which he did for the next year. Arriving at Nazianzus, Gregory found the local Christian community split by theological differences and his father accused of heresy by local monks. Gregory helped to heal the division through a combination of personal diplomacy and oratory.\n\nBy this time Emperor Julian had publicly declared himself in opposition to Christianity. In response to the emperor's rejection of the Christian faith, Gregory composed his \"Invectives Against Julian\" between 362 and 363. \"Invectives\" asserts that Christianity will overcome imperfect rulers such as Julian through love and patience. This process as described by Gregory is the public manifestation of the process of deification (\"theosis\"), which leads to a spiritual elevation and mystical union with God. Julian resolved, in late 362, to vigorously prosecute Gregory and his other Christian critics; however, the emperor perished the following year during a campaign against the Persians. With the death of the emperor, Gregory and the Eastern churches were no longer under the threat of persecution, as the new emperor Jovian was an avowed Christian and supporter of the church.\n\nGregory spent the next few years combating Arianism, which threatened to divide the region of Cappadocia. In this tense environment, Gregory interceded on behalf of his friend Basil with Bishop Eusebius of Caesarea (Mazaca). The two friends then entered a period of close fraternal cooperation as they participated in a great rhetorical contest of the Caesarean church precipitated by the arrival of accomplished Arian theologians and rhetors. In the subsequent public debates, presided over by agents of the Emperor Valens, Gregory and Basil emerged triumphant. This success confirmed for both Gregory and Basil that their futures lay in administration of the Church. Basil, who had long displayed inclinations to the episcopacy, was elected bishop of the see of Caesarea in Cappadocia in 370.\n\nGregory was ordained Bishop of Sasima in 372 by Basil. Basil created this see in order to strengthen his position in his dispute with Anthimus, bishop of Tyana. The ambitions of Gregory's father to have his son rise in the Church hierarchy and the insistence of his friend Basil convinced Gregory to accept this position despite his reservations. Gregory would later refer to his episcopal ordination as forced upon him by his strong-willed father and Basil. Describing his new bishopric, Gregory lamented how it was nothing more than an \"utterly dreadful, pokey little hole; a paltry horse-stop on the main road ... devoid of water, vegetation, or the company of gentlemen ... this was my Church of Sasima!\" He made little effort to administer his new diocese, complaining to Basil that he preferred instead to pursue a contemplative life.\n\nBy late 372 Gregory returned to Nazianzus to assist his dying father with the administration of his diocese. This strained his relationship with Basil, who insisted that Gregory resume his post at Sasima. Gregory retorted that he had no intention to continue to play the role of pawn to advance Basil's interests. He instead focused his attention on his new duties as co-adjutor of Nazianzus. It was here that Gregory preached the first of his great episcopal orations.\n\nFollowing the deaths of his mother and father in 374, Gregory continued to administer the Diocese of Nazianzus but refused to be named bishop. Donating most of his inheritance to the needy, he lived an austere existence. At the end of 375 he withdrew to a monastery at Seleukia, living there for three years. Near the end of this period his friend Basil died. Although Gregory's health did not permit him to attend the funeral, he wrote a heartfelt letter of condolence to Basil's brother, Gregory of Nyssa and composed twelve memorial poems dedicated to the memory of his departed friend.\n\nEmperor Valens died in 378. The accession of Theodosius I, a steadfast supporter of Nicene orthodoxy, was good news to those who wished to purge Constantinople of Arian and Apollinarian domination. The exiled Nicene party gradually returned to the city. From his deathbed, Basil reminded them of Gregory's capabilities and likely recommended his friend to champion the trinitarian cause in Constantinople.\n\nIn 379, the Antioch synod and its archbishop, Meletios, asked Gregory to go to Constantinople to lead a theological campaign to win over that city to Nicene orthodoxy. After much hesitation, Gregory agreed. His cousin Theodosia offered him a villa for his residence; Gregory immediately transformed much of it into a church, naming it Anastasia, \"a scene for the resurrection of the faith\". From this little chapel he delivered five powerful discourses on Nicene doctrine, explaining the nature of the Trinity and the unity of the Godhead. Refuting the Eunomion denial of the Holy Spirit's divinity, Gregory offered this argument:\n\nGregory's homilies were well received and attracted ever-growing crowds to Anastasia. Fearing his popularity, his opponents decided to strike. On the vigil of Easter in 379, an Arian mob burst into his church during worship services, wounding Gregory and killing another bishop. Escaping the mob, Gregory next found himself betrayed by his erstwhile friend, the philosopher Maximus the Cynic. Maximus, who was in secret alliance with Peter, bishop of Alexandria, attempted to seize Gregory's position and have himself ordained bishop of Constantinople. Shocked, Gregory decided to resign his office, but the faction faithful to him induced him to stay and ejected Maximus. However, the episode left him embarrassed and exposed him to criticism as a provincial simpleton unable to cope with intrigues of the imperial city.\n\nAffairs in Constantinople remained confused as Gregory's position was still unofficial and Arian priests occupied many important churches. The arrival of the emperor Theodosius in 380 settled matters in Gregory's favor. The emperor, determined to eliminate Arianism, expelled Bishop Demophilus. Gregory was subsequently enthroned as bishop of Constantinople at the Basilica of the Apostles, replacing Demophilus.\n\nTheodosius wanted to further unify the entire empire behind the orthodox position and decided to convene a church council to resolve matters of faith and discipline. Gregory was of similar mind in wishing to unify Christianity. In the spring of 381 they convened the Second Ecumenical Council in Constantinople, which was attended by 150 Eastern bishops. After the death of the presiding bishop, Meletius of Antioch, Gregory was selected to lead the Council. Hoping to reconcile the West with the East, he offered to recognize Paulinus as Patriarch of Antioch. The Egyptian and Macedonian bishops who had supported Maximus's ordination arrived late for the Council. Once there, they refused to recognise Gregory's position as head of the church of Constantinople, arguing that his transfer from the See of Sasima was canonically illegitimate.\n\nGregory was physically exhausted and worried that he was losing the confidence of the bishops and the emperor. Rather than press his case and risk further division, he decided to resign his office: \"Let me be as the Prophet Jonah! I was responsible for the storm, but I would sacrifice myself for the salvation of the ship. Seize me and throw me ... I was not happy when I ascended the throne, and gladly would I descend it.\" He shocked the Council with his surprise resignation and then delivered a dramatic speech to Theodosius asking to be released from his offices. The emperor, moved by his words, applauded, commended his labor and granted his resignation. The Council asked him to appear once more for a farewell ritual and celebratory orations. Gregory used this occasion to deliver a final address (Or. 42) and then departed.\n\nReturning to his homeland of Cappadocia, Gregory once again resumed his position as bishop of Nazianzus. He spent the next year combating the local Apollinarian heretics and struggling with periodic illness. He also began composing \"De Vita Sua\", his autobiographical poem. By the end of 383 he found his health too feeble to cope with episcopal duties. Gregory established Eulalius as bishop of Nazianzus and then withdrew into the solitude of Arianzum. After enjoying six peaceful years in retirement at his family estate, he died on January 25 in 390.\n\nThroughout his life Gregory faced stark choices. Should he pursue studies as a rhetor or philosopher? Would a monastic life be more appropriate than public ministry? Was it better to blaze his own path or follow the course mapped for him by his father and Basil? Gregory's writings illuminate the conflicts which both tormented and motivated him. Biographers suggest that it was this dialectic which defined him, forged his character and inspired his search for meaning and truth.\n\nGregory's most significant theological contributions arose from his defense of the doctrine of the Trinity. He is especially noted for his contributions to the field of pneumatology—that is, theology concerning the nature of the Holy Spirit. In this regard, Gregory is the first to use the idea of \"procession\" to describe the relationship between the Spirit and the Godhead: \"The Holy Spirit is truly Spirit, coming forth from the Father indeed but not after the manner of the Son, for it is not by generation but by \"procession\", since I must coin a word for the sake of clearness.\" Although Gregory does not fully develop the concept, the idea of procession would shape most later thought about the Holy Spirit.\n\nHe emphasized that Jesus did not cease to be God when he became a man, nor did he lose any of his divine attributes when he took on human nature. Furthermore, Gregory asserted that Christ was fully human, including a full human soul. He also proclaimed the eternality of the Holy Spirit, saying that the Holy Spirit's actions were somewhat hidden in the Old Testament but much clearer since the ascension of Jesus into Heaven and the descent of the Holy Spirit at the feast of Pentecost.\n\nIn contrast to the Neo-Arian belief that the Son is \"anomoios\", or \"unlike\" the Father, and with the Semi-Arian assertion that the Son is \"homoiousios\", or \"like\" the Father, Gregory and his fellow Cappadocians maintained the Nicaean doctrine of \"homoousia\", or consubstantiality of the Son with the Father. The Cappadocian Fathers asserted that God's nature is unknowable to man; helped to develop the framework of \"hypostases\", or three persons united in a single Godhead; illustrated how Jesus is the eikon of the Father; and explained the concept of \"theosis\", the belief that all Christians can be assimilated with God in \"imitation of the incarnate Son as the divine model.\"\n\nSome of Gregory's theological writings suggest that, like his friend Gregory of Nyssa, he may have supported some form of the doctrine of apocatastasis, the belief that God will bring all of creation into harmony with the Kingdom of Heaven. This led some late-nineteenth century Christian universalists, notably J. W. Hanson and Philip Schaff, to describe Gregory's theology as universalist. This view of Gregory is also held by some modern theologians, such as John Sachs who said that Gregory had \"leanings\" toward apocatastasis, but in a \"cautious, undogmatic\" way. However, it is not clear or universally accepted that Gregory held to the doctrine of apocatastasis.\n\nApart from the several theological discourses, Gregory was also one of the most important early Christian men of letters, a very accomplished orator, perhaps one of the greatest of his time, and also a very prolific poet, writing several poems with theological and moral matter and some with biographical content.\n\nGregory's great nephew Nichobulos served as his literary executor, preserving and editing many of his writings. A cousin, Eulalios, published several of Gregory's more noteworthy works in 391. By 400, Rufinius began translating his orations into Latin. As Gregory's works circulated throughout the empire they influenced theological thought. His orations were cited as authoritative by the First Council of Ephesus in 431. By 451 he was designated \"Theologus\", or Theologian by the Council of Chalcedon — a title held by no others save John the Apostle and Symeon the New Theologian (949–1022 AD). He is widely quoted by Eastern Orthodox theologians and highly regarded as a defender of the Christian faith. His contributions to Trinitarian theology are also influential and often cited in the Western churches. Paul Tillich credits Gregory of Nazianzus for having \"created the definitive formulae for the doctrine of the trinity\". Additionally, the Liturgy of St Gregory the Theologian in use by the Coptic Church is named after him.\n\nFollowing his death, Saint Gregory was buried at Nazianzus. His relics were transferred to Constantinople in 950, into the Church of the Holy Apostles. Part of the relics were taken from Constantinople by Crusaders during the Fourth Crusade, in 1204, and ended up in Rome. On November 27, 2004, those relics, along with those of John Chrysostom, were returned to Istanbul (Constantinople) by Pope John Paul II, with the Vatican retaining a small portion of both. The relics are now enshrined in the Patriarchal Cathedral of St. George in the Fanar.\n\nDuring the six years of life which remained to him after his final retirement to his birthplace, Gregory composed the greater part of the copious poetical works which has passed down from generation. These include a valuable autobiographical poem of nearly 2,000 lines; about one hundred other shorter poems relating to his past career; and a large number of epitaphs, epigrams, and epistles to well-known people during that era. The poems that he wrote that dealt with his personal affairs refer to the continuous illness and severe sufferings (physical and spiritual) which assailed him during his last years. In the tiny plot of ground at Arianzus, all that remained to him of his rich inheritance was by a fountain near which there was a shady walk. At this point, Gregory retired to spend his days as a hermit. It was at this point he decided to write theological discourses and poetry of both a religious and an autobiographical nature. He would sometimes receive occasional visits from intimate friends, as well as sometimes from strangers who were attracted to his retreat by his large reputation for sanctity and learning. He died about January 25, 390, although the exact date of his death is unknown.\n\nSome Western churches celebrate Gregory's feast day on January 2. The Lutheran Church Missouri Synod commemorates Gregory, along with Basil the Great and Gregory of Nyssa (the Cappadocian Fathers) on January 10. The Eastern Orthodox Church and the Eastern Catholic Churches celebrate two feast days in Gregory's honor. January 25 is his primary feast; January 30, known as the feast of the Three Great Hierarchs, commemorates him along with John Chrysostom and Basil of Caesarea. The US Episcopal Church now remembers this Gregory on May 9, and the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America commemorates Gregory of Nazianzus together with his friends St. Basil the Great and St. Gregory of Nyssa on June 14. The Church of England celebrates Gregory's Holy Day, on 2 January, as a \"Lesser Festival\".\n\n\n", "id": "13172", "title": "Gregory of Nazianzus"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13191", "text": "HTML\n\nHyperText Markup Language (HTML) is the standard markup language for creating web pages and web applications. With Cascading Style Sheets (CSS), and JavaScript, it forms a triad of cornerstone technologies for the World Wide Web. Web browsers receive HTML documents from a webserver or from local storage and render them into multimedia web pages. HTML describes the structure of a web page semantically and originally included cues for the appearance of the document.\n\nHTML elements are the building blocks of HTML pages. With HTML constructs, images and other objects, such as interactive forms may be embedded into the rendered page. It provides a means to create structured documents by denoting structural semantics for text such as headings, paragraphs, lists, links, quotes and other items. HTML elements are delineated by \"tags\", written using angle brackets. Tags such as and introduce content into the page directly. Others such as surround and provide information about document text and may include other tags as sub-elements. Browsers do not display the HTML tags, but use them to interpret the content of the page.\n\nHTML can embed programs written in a scripting language such as JavaScript which affect the behavior and content of web pages. Inclusion of CSS defines the look and layout of content. The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), maintainer of both the HTML and the CSS standards, has encouraged the use of CSS over explicit presentational HTML since 1997.\n\nIn 1980, physicist Tim Berners-Lee, a contractor at CERN, proposed and prototyped ENQUIRE, a system for CERN researchers to use and share documents. In 1989, Berners-Lee wrote a memo proposing an Internet-based hypertext system. Berners-Lee specified HTML and wrote the browser and server software in late 1990. That year, Berners-Lee and CERN data systems engineer Robert Cailliau collaborated on a joint request for funding, but the project was not formally adopted by CERN. In his personal notes from 1990 he listed \"some of the many areas in which hypertext is used\" and put an encyclopedia first.\n\nThe first publicly available description of HTML was a document called \"HTML Tags\", first mentioned on the Internet by Tim Berners-Lee in late 1991. It describes 18 elements comprising the initial, relatively simple design of HTML. Except for the hyperlink tag, these were strongly influenced by SGMLguid, an in-house Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML)-based documentation format at CERN. Eleven of these elements still exist in HTML 4.\n\nHTML is a markup language that web browsers use to interpret and compose text, images, and other material into visual or audible web pages. Default characteristics for every item of HTML markup are defined in the browser, and these characteristics can be altered or enhanced by the web page designer's additional use of CSS. Many of the text elements are found in the 1988 ISO technical report TR 9537 \"Techniques for using SGML\", which in turn covers the features of early text formatting languages such as that used by the RUNOFF command developed in the early 1960s for the CTSS (Compatible Time-Sharing System) operating system: these formatting commands were derived from the commands used by typesetters to manually format documents. However, the SGML concept of generalized markup is based on elements (nested annotated ranges with attributes) rather than merely print effects, with also the separation of structure and markup; HTML has been progressively moved in this direction with CSS.\n\nBerners-Lee considered HTML to be an application of SGML. It was formally defined as such by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) with the mid-1993 publication of the first proposal for an HTML specification, the \"Hypertext Markup Language (HTML)\" Internet Draft by Berners-Lee and Dan Connolly, which included an SGML Document Type Definition to define the grammar. The draft expired after six months, but was notable for its acknowledgment of the NCSA Mosaic browser's custom tag for embedding in-line images, reflecting the IETF's philosophy of basing standards on successful prototypes. Similarly, Dave Raggett's competing Internet-Draft, \"HTML+ (Hypertext Markup Format)\", from late 1993, suggested standardizing already-implemented features like tables and fill-out forms.\n\nAfter the HTML and HTML+ drafts expired in early 1994, the IETF created an HTML Working Group, which in 1995 completed \"HTML 2.0\", the first HTML specification intended to be treated as a standard against which future implementations should be based.\n\nFurther development under the auspices of the IETF was stalled by competing interests. Since 1996, the HTML specifications have been maintained, with input from commercial software vendors, by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). However, in 2000, HTML also became an international standard (ISO/IEC 15445:2000). HTML 4.01 was published in late 1999, with further errata published through 2001. In 2004, development began on HTML5 in the Web Hypertext Application Technology Working Group (WHATWG), which became a joint deliverable with the W3C in 2008, and completed and standardized on 28 October 2014.\n\n\n\n\nXHTML is a separate language that began as a reformulation of HTML 4.01 using XML 1.0. It is no longer being developed as a separate standard.\n\nHTML markup consists of several key components, including those called \"tags\" (and their \"attributes\"), character-based \"data types\", \"character references\" and \"entity references\". HTML tags most commonly come in pairs like and , although some represent \"empty elements\" and so are unpaired, for example . The first tag in such a pair is the \"start tag\", and the second is the \"end tag\" (they are also called \"opening tags\" and \"closing tags\").\n\nAnother important component is the HTML \"document type declaration\", which triggers standards mode rendering.\n\nThe following is an example of the classic Hello world program, a common test employed for comparing programming languages, scripting languages and markup languages. This example is made using 9 lines of code:\n\n\"(The text between and describes the web page, and the text between and is the visible page content. The markup text <nowiki>\"<title>This is a title</title>\"</nowiki> defines the browser page title.)\"\n\nThe Document Type Declaration is for HTML5. If a declaration is not included, various browsers will revert to \"quirks mode\" for rendering.\n\nHTML documents imply a structure of nested HTML elements. These are indicated in the document by HTML \"tags\", enclosed in angle brackets thus: \n\nIn the simple, general case, the extent of an element is indicated by a pair of tags: a \"start tag\" and \"end tag\" . The text content of the element, if any, is placed between these tags.\n\nTags may also enclose further tag markup between the start and end, including a mixture of tags and text. This indicates further (nested) elements, as children of the parent element.\n\nThe start tag may also include \"attributes\" within the tag. These indicate other information, such as identifiers for sections within the document, identifiers used to bind style information to the presentation of the document, and for some tags such as the used to embed images, the reference to the image resource.\n\nSome elements, such as the line break , do not permit \"any\" embedded content, either text or further tags. These require only a single empty tag (akin to a start tag) and do not use an end tag.\n\nMany tags, particularly the closing end tag for the very commonly used paragraph element , are optional. An HTML browser or other agent can infer the closure for the end of an element from the context and the structural rules defined by the HTML standard. These rules are complex and not widely understood by most HTML coders.\n\nThe general form of an HTML element is therefore: . Some HTML elements are defined as \"empty elements\" and take the form . Empty elements may enclose no content, for instance, the tag or the inline tag.\nThe name of an HTML element is the name used in the tags.\nNote that the end tag's name is preceded by a slash character, \"/\", and that in empty elements the end tag is neither required nor allowed.\nIf attributes are not mentioned, default values are used in each case.\n\nHeader of the HTML document: <head>...</head>. The title is included in the head, for example:\n\nHeadings: HTML headings are defined with the to tags:\nParagraphs:\nLine breaks:. The difference between and is that \"br\" breaks a line without altering the semantic structure of the page, whereas \"p\" sections the page into paragraphs. Note also that \"br\" is an \"empty element\" in that, although it may have attributes, it can take no content and it may not have an end tag.\n\nThis is a link in HTML. To create a link the tag is used. The codice_1 attribute holds the URL address of the link.\n\nComments:\n\nThere are several types of markup elements used in HTML:\n\nMost of the attributes of an element are name-value pairs, separated by \"=\" and written within the start tag of an element after the element's name. The value may be enclosed in single or double quotes, although values consisting of certain characters can be left unquoted in HTML (but not XHTML) . Leaving attribute values unquoted is considered unsafe. In contrast with name-value pair attributes, there are some attributes that affect the element simply by their presence in the start tag of the element, like the codice_3 attribute for the codice_4 element.\n\nThere are several common attributes that may appear in many elements :\n\n\nThe abbreviation element, codice_15, can be used to demonstrate some of these attributes :\n\nThis example displays as HTML; in most browsers, pointing the cursor at the abbreviation should display the title text \"Hypertext Markup Language.\"\n\nMost elements take the language-related attribute codice_16 to specify text direction, such as with \"rtl\" for right-to-left text in, for example, Arabic, Persian or Hebrew.\n\nAs of version 4.0, HTML defines a set of 252 character entity references and a set of 1,114,050 numeric character references, both of which allow individual characters to be written via simple markup, rather than literally. A literal character and its markup counterpart are considered equivalent and are rendered identically.\n\nThe ability to \"escape\" characters in this way allows for the characters codice_17 and codice_18 (when written as codice_19 and codice_20, respectively) to be interpreted as character data, rather than markup. For example, a literal codice_17 normally indicates the start of a tag, and codice_18 normally indicates the start of a character entity reference or numeric character reference; writing it as codice_20 or codice_24 or codice_25 allows codice_18 to be included in the content of an element or in the value of an attribute. The double-quote character (codice_27), when not used to quote an attribute value, must also be escaped as codice_28 or codice_29 or codice_30 when it appears within the attribute value itself. Equivalently, the single-quote character (codice_31), when not used to quote an attribute value, must also be escaped as codice_32 or codice_33 (or as codice_34 in HTML5 or XHTML documents) when it appears within the attribute value itself. If document authors overlook the need to escape such characters, some browsers can be very forgiving and try to use context to guess their intent. The result is still invalid markup, which makes the document less accessible to other browsers and to other user agents that may try to parse the document for search and indexing purposes for example.\n\nEscaping also allows for characters that are not easily typed, or that are not available in the document's character encoding, to be represented within element and attribute content. For example, the acute-accented codice_35 (codice_36), a character typically found only on Western European and South American keyboards, can be written in any HTML document as the entity reference codice_37 or as the numeric references codice_38 or codice_39, using characters that are available on all keyboards and are supported in all character encodings. Unicode character encodings such as UTF-8 are compatible with all modern browsers and allow direct access to almost all the characters of the world's writing systems.\n\nHTML defines several data types for element content, such as script data and stylesheet data, and a plethora of types for attribute values, including IDs, names, URIs, numbers, units of length, languages, media descriptors, colors, character encodings, dates and times, and so on. All of these data types are specializations of character data.\n\nHTML documents are required to start with a Document Type Declaration (informally, a \"doctype\"). In browsers, the doctype helps to define the rendering mode—particularly whether to use quirks mode.\n\nThe original purpose of the doctype was to enable parsing and validation of HTML documents by SGML tools based on the Document Type Definition (DTD). The DTD to which the DOCTYPE refers contains a machine-readable grammar specifying the permitted and prohibited content for a document conforming to such a DTD. Browsers, on the other hand, do not implement HTML as an application of SGML and by consequence do not read the DTD.\n\nHTML5 does not define a DTD; therefore, in HTML5 the doctype declaration is simpler and shorter:\n\nAn example of an HTML 4 doctype\n\nThis declaration references the DTD for the \"strict\" version of HTML 4.01. SGML-based validators read the DTD in order to properly parse the document and to perform validation. In modern browsers, a valid doctype activates standards mode as opposed to quirks mode.\n\nIn addition, HTML 4.01 provides Transitional and Frameset DTDs, as explained below. Transitional type is the most inclusive, incorporating current tags as well as older or \"deprecated\" tags, with the Strict DTD excluding deprecated tags. Frameset has all tags necessary to make frames on a page along with the tags included in transitional type.\n\nSemantic HTML is a way of writing HTML that emphasizes the meaning of the encoded information over its presentation (look). HTML has included semantic markup from its inception, but has also included presentational markup, such as codice_40, codice_40 and codice_40 tags. There are also the semantically neutral span and div tags. Since the late 1990s when Cascading Style Sheets were beginning to work in most browsers, web authors have been encouraged to avoid the use of presentational HTML markup with a view to the separation of presentation and content.\n\nIn a 2001 discussion of the Semantic Web, Tim Berners-Lee and others gave examples of ways in which intelligent software \"agents\" may one day automatically crawl the web and find, filter and correlate previously unrelated, published facts for the benefit of human users. Such agents are not commonplace even now, but some of the ideas of Web 2.0, mashups and price comparison websites may be coming close. The main difference between these web application hybrids and Berners-Lee's semantic agents lies in the fact that the current aggregation and hybridization of information is usually designed in by web developers, who already know the web locations and the API semantics of the specific data they wish to mash, compare and combine.\n\nAn important type of web agent that does crawl and read web pages automatically, without prior knowledge of what it might find, is the web crawler or search-engine spider. These software agents are dependent on the semantic clarity of web pages they find as they use various techniques and algorithms to read and index millions of web pages a day and provide web users with search facilities without which the World Wide Web's usefulness would be greatly reduced.\n\nIn order for search-engine spiders to be able to rate the significance of pieces of text they find in HTML documents, and also for those creating mashups and other hybrids as well as for more automated agents as they are developed, the semantic structures that exist in HTML need to be widely and uniformly applied to bring out the meaning of published text.\n\nPresentational markup tags are deprecated in current HTML and XHTML recommendations and are illegal in HTML5.\n\nGood semantic HTML also improves the accessibility of web documents (see also Web Content Accessibility Guidelines). For example, when a screen reader or audio browser can correctly ascertain the structure of a document, it will not waste the visually impaired user's time by reading out repeated or irrelevant information when it has been marked up correctly.\n\nHTML documents can be delivered by the same means as any other computer file. However, they are most often delivered either by HTTP from a web server or by email.\n\nThe World Wide Web is composed primarily of HTML documents transmitted from web servers to web browsers using the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP). However, HTTP is used to serve images, sound, and other content, in addition to HTML. To allow the web browser to know how to handle each document it receives, other information is transmitted along with the document. This meta data usually includes the MIME type (e.g. text/html or application/xhtml+xml) and the character encoding (see Character encoding in HTML).\n\nIn modern browsers, the MIME type that is sent with the HTML document may affect how the document is initially interpreted. A document sent with the XHTML MIME type is expected to be well-formed XML; syntax errors may cause the browser to fail to render it. The same document sent with the HTML MIME type might be displayed successfully, since some browsers are more lenient with HTML.\n\nThe W3C recommendations state that XHTML 1.0 documents that follow guidelines set forth in the recommendation's Appendix C may be labeled with either MIME Type. XHTML 1.1 also states that XHTML 1.1 documents should be labeled with either MIME type.\n\nMost graphical email clients allow the use of a subset of HTML (often ill-defined) to provide formatting and semantic markup not available with plain text. This may include typographic information like coloured headings, emphasized and quoted text, inline images and diagrams. Many such clients include both a GUI editor for composing HTML e-mail messages and a rendering engine for displaying them. Use of HTML in e-mail is criticized by some because of compatibility issues, because it can help disguise phishing attacks, because of accessibility issues for blind or visually impaired people, because it can confuse spam filters and because the message size is larger than plain text.\n\nThe most common filename extension for files containing HTML is .html. A common abbreviation of this is .htm, which originated because some early operating systems and file systems, such as DOS and the limitations imposed by FAT data structure, limited file extensions to three letters.\n\nAn HTML Application (HTA; file extension \".hta\") is a Microsoft Windows application that uses HTML and Dynamic HTML in a browser to provide the application's graphical interface. A regular HTML file is confined to the security model of the web browser's security, communicating only to web servers and manipulating only webpage objects and site cookies. An HTA runs as a fully trusted application and therefore has more privileges, like creation/editing/removal of files and Windows Registry entries. Because they operate outside the browser's security model, HTAs cannot be executed via HTTP, but must be downloaded (just like an EXE file) and executed from local file system.\n\nSince its inception, HTML and its associated protocols gained acceptance relatively quickly. However, no clear standards existed in the early years of the language. Though its creators originally conceived of HTML as a semantic language devoid of presentation details, practical uses pushed many presentational elements and attributes into the language, driven largely by the various browser vendors. The latest standards surrounding HTML reflect efforts to overcome the sometimes chaotic development of the language and to create a rational foundation for building both meaningful and well-presented documents. To return HTML to its role as a semantic language, the W3C has developed style languages such as CSS and XSL to shoulder the burden of presentation. In conjunction, the HTML specification has slowly reined in the presentational elements.\n\nThere are two axes differentiating various variations of HTML as currently specified: SGML-based HTML versus XML-based HTML (referred to as XHTML) on one axis, and strict versus transitional (loose) versus frameset on the other axis.\n\nOne difference in the latest HTML specifications lies in the distinction between the SGML-based specification and the XML-based specification. The XML-based specification is usually called XHTML to distinguish it clearly from the more traditional definition. However, the root element name continues to be \"html\" even in the XHTML-specified HTML. The W3C intended XHTML 1.0 to be identical to HTML 4.01 except where limitations of XML over the more complex SGML require workarounds. Because XHTML and HTML are closely related, they are sometimes documented in parallel. In such circumstances, some authors conflate the two names as (X)HTML or X(HTML).\n\nLike HTML 4.01, XHTML 1.0 has three sub-specifications: strict, transitional and frameset.\n\nAside from the different opening declarations for a document, the differences between an HTML 4.01 and XHTML 1.0 document—in each of the corresponding DTDs—are largely syntactic. The underlying syntax of HTML allows many shortcuts that XHTML does not, such as elements with optional opening or closing tags, and even empty elements which must not have an end tag. By contrast, XHTML requires all elements to have an opening tag and a closing tag. XHTML, however, also introduces a new shortcut: an XHTML tag may be opened and closed within the same tag, by including a slash before the end of the tag like this: codice_43. The introduction of this shorthand, which is not used in the SGML declaration for HTML 4.01, may confuse earlier software unfamiliar with this new convention. A fix for this is to include a space before closing the tag, as such: codice_44.\n\nTo understand the subtle differences between HTML and XHTML, consider the transformation of a valid and well-formed XHTML 1.0 document that adheres to Appendix C (see below) into a valid HTML 4.01 document. To make this translation requires the following steps:\n\nThose are the main changes necessary to translate a document from XHTML 1.0 to HTML 4.01. To translate from HTML to XHTML would also require the addition of any omitted opening or closing tags. Whether coding in HTML or XHTML it may just be best to always include the optional tags within an HTML document rather than remembering which tags can be omitted.\n\nA well-formed XHTML document adheres to all the syntax requirements of XML. A valid document adheres to the content specification for XHTML, which describes the document structure.\n\nThe W3C recommends several conventions to ensure an easy migration between HTML and XHTML (see HTML Compatibility Guidelines). The following steps can be applied to XHTML 1.0 documents only:\n\nBy carefully following the W3C's compatibility guidelines, a user agent should be able to interpret the document equally as HTML or XHTML. For documents that are XHTML 1.0 and have been made compatible in this way, the W3C permits them to be served either as HTML (with a codice_48 MIME type), or as XHTML (with an codice_53 or codice_54 MIME type). When delivered as XHTML, browsers should use an XML parser, which adheres strictly to the XML specifications for parsing the document's contents.\n\nHTML 4 defined three different versions of the language: Strict, Transitional (once called Loose) and Frameset. The Strict version is intended for new documents and is considered best practice, while the Transitional and Frameset versions were developed to make it easier to transition documents that conformed to older HTML specification or didn't conform to any specification to a version of HTML 4. The Transitional and Frameset versions allow for presentational markup, which is omitted in the Strict version. Instead, cascading style sheets are encouraged to improve the presentation of HTML documents. Because XHTML 1 only defines an XML syntax for the language defined by HTML 4, the same differences apply to XHTML 1 as well.\n\nThe Transitional version allows the following parts of the vocabulary, which are not included in the Strict version:\n\nThe Frameset version includes everything in the Transitional version, as well as the codice_136 element (used instead of codice_55) and the codice_138 element.\n\nIn addition to the above transitional differences, the frameset specifications (whether XHTML 1.0 or HTML 4.01) specify a different content model, with codice_136 replacing codice_55, that contains either codice_138 elements, or optionally codice_59 with a codice_55.\n\nAs this list demonstrates, the loose versions of the specification are maintained for legacy support. However, contrary to popular misconceptions, the move to XHTML does not imply a removal of this legacy support. Rather the X in XML stands for extensible and the W3C is modularizing the entire specification and opening it up to independent extensions. The primary achievement in the move from XHTML 1.0 to XHTML 1.1 is the modularization of the entire specification. The strict version of HTML is deployed in XHTML 1.1 through a set of modular extensions to the base XHTML 1.1 specification. Likewise, someone looking for the loose (transitional) or frameset specifications will find similar extended XHTML 1.1 support (much of it is contained in the legacy or frame modules). The modularization also allows for separate features to develop on their own timetable. So for example, XHTML 1.1 will allow quicker migration to emerging XML standards such as MathML (a presentational and semantic math language based on XML) and XForms—a new highly advanced web-form technology to replace the existing HTML forms.\n\nIn summary, the HTML 4 specification primarily reined in all the various HTML implementations into a single clearly written specification based on SGML. XHTML 1.0, ported this specification, as is, to the new XML defined specification. Next, XHTML 1.1 takes advantage of the extensible nature of XML and modularizes the whole specification. XHTML 2.0 was intended to be the first step in adding new features to the specification in a standards-body-based approach.\n\nThe WHATWG considers their work as \"living standard\" HTML for what constitutes the state of the art in major browser implementations by Apple (Safari), Google (Chrome), Mozilla (Firefox), Opera (Opera), and others. HTML5 is specified by the HTML Working Group of the W3C following the W3C process. both specifications are similar and mostly derived from each other, i.e., the work on HTML5 started with an older WHATWG draft, and later the WHATWG \"living standard\" was based on HTML5 drafts in 2011.\n\nHTML lacks some of the features found in earlier hypertext systems, such as source tracking, fat links and others. Even some hypertext features that were in early versions of HTML have been ignored by most popular web browsers until recently, such as the link element and in-browser Web page editing.\n\nSometimes Web services or browser manufacturers remedy these shortcomings. For instance, wikis and content management systems allow surfers to edit the Web pages they visit.\n\nThere are some WYSIWYG editors (What You See Is What You Get), in which the user lays out everything as it is to appear in the HTML document using a graphical user interface (GUI), often similar to word processors. The editor renders the document rather than show the code, so authors do not require extensive knowledge of HTML.\n\nThe WYSIWYG editing model has been criticized, primarily because of the low quality of the generated code; there are voices advocating a change to the WYSIWYM model (What You See Is What You Mean).\n\nWYSIWYG editors remain a controversial topic because of their perceived flaws such as:\n\n\n\n", "id": "13191", "title": "HTML"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13192", "text": "Hacking\n\nHacking may refer to:\n\n\n", "id": "13192", "title": "Hacking"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13207", "text": "Hector\n\nIn Greek mythology, Hector ( \"Hektōr\", ) was a Trojan prince and the greatest fighter for Troy in the Trojan War. As the first-born son of King Priam and Queen Hecuba, who was a descendant of Dardanus and Tros, the founder of Troy, he was a prince of the royal house and the heir apparent to his father's throne. He was married to Andromache, with whom he had an infant son, Scamandrius (whom the people of Troy called Astyanax). He acted as leader of the Trojans and their allies in the defense of Troy, \"killing 31,000 Greek fighters\", offers Hyginus. During the European Middle Ages, Hector figures as one of the Nine Worthies noted by Jacques de Longuyon, known not only for his courage but also for his noble and courtly nature. Indeed, Homer places Hector as peace-loving, thoughtful as well as bold, a good son, husband and father, and without darker motives. James Redfield writes of Hector as a \"martyr to loyalties, a witness to the things of this world, a hero ready to die for the precious imperfections of ordinary life.\"\n\nIn Greek, \"Héktōr\" is a derivative of the verb ἔχειν \"ékhein\", archaic form *ἕχειν \"hékhein\", 'to have' or 'to hold' from Proto-Indo-European *\"seǵ-\" 'to hold'. \"Héktōr\", or \"Éktōr\" as found in Aeolic poetry, is also an epithet of Zeus in his capacity as 'he who holds [everything together]'. Hector's name could thus be taken to mean 'holding fast'.\n\nAccording to the \"Iliad\", Hector did not approve of war between the Greeks and the Trojans.\n\nFor ten years, the Achaeans besieged Troy and their allies in the east. Hector commanded the Trojan army, with a number of subordinates including Polydamas, and his brothers Deiphobus, Helenus, and Paris. By all accounts, Hector was the best warrior the Trojans and all their allies could field, and his fighting prowess was admired by Greeks and his own people alike.\n\nDiomedes and Odysseus, when faced with his attack, described him as what Robert Fagles translated as an 'incredible dynamite', and a 'maniac'.\n\nIn the \"Iliad\", Hector's exploits in the war prior to the events of the book are recapitulated. He had fought the Greek champion Protesilaus in single combat at the start of the war and killed him. A prophecy had stated that the first Greek to land on Trojan soil would die. Thus, Protesilaus, Ajax, and Odysseus would not land. Finally, Odysseus threw his shield out and landed on that, and Protesilaus jumped next from his own ship. In the ensuing fight, Hector killed him, fulfilling the prophecy.\n\nAt the advice of his brother, Helenus (who also is divinely inspired), and being told by him that he is not destined to die yet, Hector managed to get both armies seated and challenges any one of the Greek warriors to single combat. The Argives were initially reluctant to accept the challenge. However, after Nestor's chiding, nine Greek heroes stepped up to the challenge and drew by lot to see who was to face Hector. Ajax wins and fights Hector to a stalemate for the entire day. With neither able to achieve victory, they express admiration for each other's courage, skill, and strength. Hector gave Ajax his sword, which Ajax later uses to kill himself. Ajax gives Hector his girdle, which later was used to attach Hector's corpse to Achilles' chariot by which he is dragged around the walls of Troy.\n\nThe Greek and the Trojans make a truce to bury the dead. In the early dawn the next day the Greeks take advantage of it to build a wall and ditch around the ships. Zeus is watching in a distance.\n\nAnother mention of Hector's exploits in the early years of war was given in the Iliad book 9. During the embassy to Achilles, Odysseus, Phoenix and Ajax all try to persuade Achilles to rejoin the fight. In his response, Achilles points out that while Hector was terrorizing the Greek forces now, and that while he himself had fought in their front lines, Hector had 'no wish' to take his force far beyond the walls and out from the Skiaian Gate and nearby oak tree. He then claims, 'There he stood up to me alone one day, and he barely escaped my onslaught.'\n\nA 2004 film version of \"Troy\" has Achilles slaying Hector following a duel, whereas in the Iliad it is rather different. In the Iliad, Hector remains outside the walls, while his army flees into the city. As Achilles approaches, Hector stands his ground, fights and dies upon looking up at Troy. The film version of his death more resembles the single combat between the champions mentioned by Achilles in the Iliad, book 9.\n\nIn the tenth year of the war, observing Paris avoiding combat with Menelaus, Hector upbraids him with having brought trouble on his whole country and now refusing to fight. Paris therefore proposes single combat between himself and Menelaus, with Helen to go to the victor, ending the war. The duel, however, leads to inconclusive results due to intervention by Aphrodite who leads Paris off the field. After Pandarus wounds Menelaus with an arrow the fight begins again. \n\nThe Greeks attack and drive the Trojans back. Hector must now go out to lead a counter-attack. His wife, Andromache, carrying in her arms their son Astyanax, intercepts him at the gate, pleading with him not to go out for her sake as well as his son's. Hector knows that Troy and the house of Priam are doomed to fall and that the gloomy fate of his wife and infant son will be to die or go into slavery in a foreign land. With understanding, compassion, and tenderness he explains that he cannot personally refuse to fight, and comforts her with the idea that no one can take him until it is his time to go. The gleaming bronze helmet frightens Astyanax and makes him cry. Hector takes it off, embraces his wife and son, and for his sake prays aloud to Zeus that his son might be chief after him, become more glorious in battle than he, and to bring home the blood of his enemies and make Hector's wife, his mother, proud. Once he left back for battle those in the house began to mourn as they knew he would not return. \n\nHector and Paris pass through the gate and rally the Trojans, raising havoc among the Greeks.\n\nZeus weighs the fates of the two armies in the balance, and that of the Greeks sinks down. The Trojans press the Greeks into their camp over the ditch and wall and would have laid hands on the ships, but Agamemnon rallies the Greeks in person. The Trojans are driven off, night falls, and Hector resolves to take the camp and burn the ships next day. The Trojans bivouac in the field.\nThe next day Agamemnon rallies the Greeks and drives the Trojans\n\nHector refrains from battle until Agamemnon leaves the field, wounded in the arm by a spear. Then Hector rallies the Trojans:\n\nDiomedes and Odysseus hinder Hector and win the Greeks some time to retreat, but the Trojans sweep down upon the wall and rain blows upon it. The Greeks in the camp contest the gates to secure entrance for their fleeing warriors. The Trojans try to pull down the ramparts while the Greeks rain arrows upon them. Hector smashes open a gate with a large stone, clears the gate and calls on the Trojans to scale the wall, which they do, and\n\nThe battle rages inside the camp. Hector goes down, hit by a stone thrown by Ajax, but Apollo arrives from Olympus and infuses strength into \"the shepherd of the people\", who orders a chariot attack, with Apollo clearing the way. Many combats, deaths, boasts, threats, epithets, figures of speech, stories, lines of poetry and books of the Iliad later, Hector lays hold of Protesilaus' ship and calls for fire. The Trojans cannot bring it to him, as Ajax kills everyone who tries. Eventually, Hector breaks Ajax' spear with his sword, forcing him to give ground, and he sets the ship on fire.\n\nThese events are all according to the will of the gods, who have decreed the fall of Troy, and therefore intend to tempt Achilles back into the war. Patroclus, Achilles' closest companion, disguised in the armor of Achilles, enters the combat leading the Myrmidons and the rest of the Achaeans to force a Trojan withdrawal. After Patroclus has routed the Trojan army, Hector, with the aid of Apollo and Euphorbus, kills Patroclus, vaunting over him:\n\nThe dying Patroclus foretells Hector's death:\n\nHector strips the armor of Achilles off the fallen Patroclus and gives it to his men to take back to the city. Glaucus accuses Hector of cowardice for not challenging Ajax. Stung, Hector calls for the armor, puts it on, and uses it to rally the Trojans. Zeus regards the donning of a hero's armor as an act of insolence by a fool about to die, but it makes Hector strong for now.\n\nThe next day, the enraged Achilles renounces the wrath that kept him out of action and routs the Trojans, forcing them back to the city. Hector chooses to remain outside the gates of Troy to face Achilles, partly because had he listened to Polydamas and retreated with his troops the previous night, Achilles would not have killed so many Trojans. When he sees Achilles, however, Hector is seized by fear and turns to flee. Achilles chases him around the city three times before Hector masters his fear and turns to face Achilles. But Athena, in the disguise of Hector's brother Deiphobus, has deluded Hector. He requests from Achilles that the victor should return the other's body after the duel, (though Hector himself made it clear he planned to throw the body of Patroclus to the dogs) but Achilles refuses. Achilles hurls his spear at Hector, who dodges it, but Athena brings it back to Achilles' hands without Hector noticing. Hector then throws his own spear at Achilles; it hits his shield and does no injury. When Hector turns to face his supposed brother to retrieve another spear, he sees no one there. At that moment he realizes that he is doomed. Hector decides that he will go down fighting and that men will talk about his bravery in years to come. The desire to achieve ever-lasting honor was one of the most fierce for soldiers living in the timocratic (honor based) society of the age.\nHector pulls out his sword, now his only weapon, and charges. A raging duel ensues, and eventually Achilles finishes it. He slices at Hector's armor, throwing him off guard and spinning him around. Achilles spins around too, and when Hector turns around completely, Achilles grapples him, stabbing him through the chest with his sword and throwing him a short way over his shoulder. Hector, in his final moments, begs Achilles for an honorable funeral, but Achilles replies that he will let the dogs and vultures devour Hector's flesh. (Throughout the Homeric poems, several references are made to dogs, vultures, and other creatures that devour the dead. It can be seen as another way of saying one will die.) Hector dies, prophesying that Achilles' death will follow soon. \n\n\"Be careful now; for I might be made into the gods' curse...upon you, on that day when Paris and Phoibos Apollo...destroy you in the Skainan gates, for all your valor.\" \n\nAfter his death, Achilles slits Hector's heels and passes the girdle that Ajax had given Hector through the slits. He then fastens the girdle to his chariot and drives his fallen enemy through the dust to the Danaan camp. For the next twelve days, Achilles mistreats the body, but it remains preserved from all injury by Apollo and Aphrodite. After these twelve days, the gods can no longer stand watching it and send down two messengers: Iris, another messenger god, and Thetis, the mother of Achilles. Thetis has told Achilles to allow King Priam to come and take the body for ransom. Once King Priam has been notified that Achilles will allow him to claim the body, he goes to his strongroom to withdraw the ransom. The ransom King Priam offers includes twelve fine robes, twelve white mantles, several richly embroidered tunics, ten bars of yellow gold, a special gold cup, and several cauldrons. Priam himself goes to claim his son's body, and Hermes grants him safe passage by casting a charm that will make anyone who looks at him fall asleep.\nAchilles, moved by Priam's actions and following his mother's orders sent by Zeus, returns Hector's body to Priam and promises him a truce of twelve days to allow the Trojans to perform funeral rites for Hector. Priam returns to Troy with the body of his son, and it is given full funeral honors. Even Helen mourns Hector, for he had always been kind to her and protected her from spite. The last lines of the \"Iliad\" are dedicated to Hector's funeral. Homer concludes by referring to the Trojan prince as the \"Breaker of Horses.\"\n\nThe most valuable historical evidence for the Battle of Troy are treaties and letters mentioned in Hittite cuneiform texts of the same approximate era, which mention an unruly Western Anatolian warlord named \"Piyama-Radu\" (possibly Priam) and his successor \"Alaksandu\" (possibly Alexander, the nickname of Paris) both based in \"Wilusa\" (possibly Ilion/Ilios), as well as the god \"Apaliunas\" (possibly Apollo). \n\nOther such pieces of evidence are names of Trojan heroes in Linear B tablets. Twenty out of fifty-eight men's names also known from Homer, including , \"E-ko-to\" (Hector), are Trojan warriors and some, including Hector, are in a servile capacity. No such conclusion that they are the offspring of Trojan captive women is warranted. Generally the public has to be content with the knowledge that these names existed in Greek in Mycenaean times, although Page hypothesizes that Hector \"may very well be ... a familiar Greek form impressed on a similar-sounding foreign name.\"\n\nWhen Pausanias visited Thebes in Boeotia, in the second century AD, he was shown Hector's tomb and was told that the bones had been transported to Thebes according to a Delphic oracle. Moses I. Finley observes \"this typical bit of fiction must mean that there was an old Theban hero Hector, a Greek, whose myths antedated the Homeric poems. Even after Homer had located Hector in Troy for all time, the Thebans held on to their hero, and the Delphic oracle provided the necessary sanction.\"\n\n\nHector has been portrayed by a variety of actors, including:\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "13207", "title": "Hector"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13208", "text": "Hera\n\nHera (, , Greek , \"Hērā\", equivalently , \"Hērē\", in Ionic and Homer) is the goddess of women and marriage in Greek mythology and religion. She is the daughter of the Titans Cronus and Rhea. Hera is married to her brother Zeus and is titled as the Queen of Heaven. Some of her characteristics include her jealous and vengeful nature against Zeus's other lovers and offspring and against the mortals who cross her.\n\nHera is commonly seen with the animals she considers sacred including the cow, lion and the peacock. Portrayed as majestic and solemn, often enthroned, and crowned with the \"polos\" (a high cylindrical crown worn by several of the Great Goddesses), Hera may hold a pomegranate in her hand, emblem of fertile blood and death and a substitute for the narcotic capsule of the opium poppy. Scholar of Greek mythology Walter Burkert writes in \"Greek Religion\", \"Nevertheless, there are memories of an earlier aniconic representation, as a pillar in Argos and as a plank in Samos.\"\n\nHer counterpart in the religion of ancient Rome was Juno.\n\nThe name of Hera may have several of mutually exclusive etymologies; one possibility is to connect it with Greek ὥρα \"hōra\", season, and to interpret it as ripe for marriage and according to Plato ἐρατή \"eratē\", \"beloved\" as Zeus is said to have married her for love. According to Plutarch, Hera was an allegorical name and an anagram of \"aēr\" (ἀήρ, \"air\"). So begins the section on Hera in Walter Burkert's \"Greek Religion\". In a note, he records other scholars' arguments \"for the meaning Mistress as a feminine to \"Heros\", Master.\" John Chadwick, a decipherer of Linear B, remarks \"her name may be connected with \"hērōs\", ἥρως, 'hero', but that is no help, since it too is etymologically obscure.\" A. J. van Windekens, offers \"young cow, heifer\", which is consonant with Hera's common epithet βοῶπις (\"boōpis\", \"cow-eyed\"). R. S. P. Beekes has suggested a Pre-Greek origin. Her name is attested in Mycenaean Greek written in the Linear B syllabic script as , \"e-ra\", appearing on tablets found in Pylos and Thebes.\n\nHera may have been the first the Greeks dedicated an enclosed roofed temple sanctuary to, at Samos about 800 BCE. It was replaced later by the Heraion, one of the largest of all Greek temples (Greek altars were in front of the temples, under the open sky). There were many temples built on this site so evidence is somewhat confusing and archaeological dates are uncertain.\n\nThe temple created by the Rhoecus sculptors and architects was destroyed between 570-560 BCE. This was replaced by the Polycratean temple 540-530 BCE. In one of these temples we see a forest of 155 columns. There is also no evidence of tiles on this temple suggesting either the temple was never finished or that the temple was open to the sky.\n\nEarlier sanctuaries, whose dedication to Hera is less certain, were of the Mycenaean type called \"house sanctuaries\". Samos excavations have revealed votive offerings, many of them late 8th and 7th centuries BCE, which show that Hera at Samos was not merely a local Greek goddess of the Aegean: the museum there contains figures of gods and suppliants and other votive offerings from Armenia, Babylon, Iran, Assyria, Egypt, testimony to the reputation which this sanctuary of Hera enjoyed and to the large influx of pilgrims. Compared to this mighty goddess, who also possessed the earliest temple at Olympia and two of the great fifth and sixth century temples of Paestum, the termagant of Homer and the myths is an \"almost...comic figure\" according to Burkert.\nThough greatest and earliest free-standing temple to Hera was the Heraion of Samos, in the Greek mainland Hera was especially worshipped as \"Argive Hera\" (\"Hera Argeia\") at her sanctuary that stood between the former Mycenaean city-states of Argos and Mycenae, where the festivals in her honor called \"Heraia\" were celebrated. \"The three cities I love best,\" the ox-eyed Queen of Heaven declares (\"Iliad\", book iv) \"are Argos, Sparta and Mycenae of the broad streets.\" There were also temples to Hera in Olympia, Corinth, Tiryns, Perachora and the sacred island of Delos. In Magna Graecia, two Doric temples to Hera were constructed at Paestum, about 550 BCE and about 450 BCE. One of them, long called the \"Temple of Poseidon\" was identified in the 1950s as a second temple there of Hera.\n\nIn Euboea the festival of the Great Daedala, sacred to Hera, was celebrated on a sixty-year cycle.\n\nHera's importance in the early archaic period is attested by the large building projects undertaken in her honor. The temples of Hera in the two main centers of her cult, the Heraion of Samos and the Heraion of Argos in the Argolid, were the very earliest monumental Greek temples constructed, in the 8th century BCE.\n\nAccording to Walter Burkert, both Hera and Demeter have many characteristic attributes of Pre-Greek Great Goddesses.\n\nAccording to the Homeric Hymn III to Delian Apollo, Hera detained Eileithyia to already prevent Leto from going into labor with Artemis and Apollo, since the father was Zeus. The other goddesses present at the birthing on Delos sent Iris to bring her. As she stepped upon the island, the divine birth began. In the myth of the birth of Heracles, it is Hera herself who sits at the door instead, delaying the birth of Heracles until her protégé, Eurystheus, had been born first.\n\nThe Homeric Hymn to Pythian Apollo makes the monster Typhaon the offspring of archaic Hera in her Minoan form, produced out of herself, like a monstrous version of Hephaestus, and whelped in a cave in Cilicia. She gave the creature to Python to raise.\n\nIn the Temple of Hera at Olympia, Hera's seated cult figure was older than the warrior figure of Zeus that accompanied it. Homer expressed her relationship with Zeus delicately in the \"Iliad\", in which she declares to Zeus, \"I am Cronus' eldest daughter, and am honourable not on this ground only, but also because I am your wife, and you are king of the gods.\" Though Zeus is often called \"Zeus Heraios\" 'Zeus, (consort) of Hera', Homer's treatment of Hera is less than respectful, and in late anecdotal versions of the myths (see below) she appeared to spend most of her time plotting revenge on the nymphs seduced by her consort, for Hera upheld all the old right rules of Hellene society and sorority.\n\nThere has been considerable scholarship, reaching back to Johann Jakob Bachofen in the mid-nineteenth century, about the possibility that Hera, whose early importance in Greek religion is firmly established, was originally the goddess of a matriarchal people, presumably inhabiting Greece before the Hellenes. In this view, her activity as goddess of marriage established the patriarchal bond of her own subordination: her resistance to the conquests of Zeus is rendered as Hera's \"jealousy\", the main theme of literary anecdotes that undercut her ancient cult.\n\nHowever, it remains a controversial claim that primitive matriarchy existed in Greece or elsewhere.\n\nHera is the daughter of the youngest Titan Cronus and his wife, and sister, Rhea. Cronus was fated to be overthrown by one of his children; to prevent this, he swallowed all of his newborn children whole until Rhea tricked him into swallowing a stone instead of her youngest child, Zeus. Zeus grew up in secret and when he grew up he tricked his father into regurgitating his siblings, including Hera. Zeus then led the revolt against the Titans, banished them, and divided the dominion over the world with his brothers Poseidon and Hades.\n\nHera was most known as the matron goddess, \"Hera Teleia\"; but she presided over weddings as well. In myth and cult, fragmentary references and archaic practices remain of the sacred marriage of Hera and Zeus, and at Plataea, there was a sculpture of Hera seated as a bride by Callimachus, as well as the matronly standing Hera.\n\nHera was also worshipped as a virgin: there was a tradition in Stymphalia in Arcadia that there had been a triple shrine to Hera the Girl (Παις [Pais]), the Adult Woman (Τελεια [Teleia]), and the Separated (Χήρη [Chḗrē] 'Widowed' or 'Divorced'). In the region around Argos, the temple of Hera in Hermione near Argos was to Hera the Virgin. At the spring of Kanathos, close to Nauplia, Hera renewed her virginity annually, in rites that were not to be spoken of (\"arrheton\"). The Female figure, showing her \"Moon\" over the lake is also appropriate, as Hebe, Hera, and Hecate; new moon, full moon, and old moon in that order and otherwise personified as the Virgin of spring, The Mother of Summer, and the destroying Crone of Autumn.\n\nIn Hellenistic imagery, Hera's chariot was pulled by peacocks, birds not known to Greeks before the conquests of Alexander. Alexander's tutor, Aristotle, refers to it as \"the Persian bird.\" The peacock motif was revived in the Renaissance iconography that unified Hera and Juno, and which European painters focused on. A bird that had been associated with Hera on an archaic level, where most of the Aegean goddesses were associated with \"their\" bird, was the cuckoo, which appears in mythic fragments concerning the first wooing of a virginal Hera by Zeus.\n\nHer archaic association was primarily with cattle, as a Cow Goddess, who was especially venerated in \"cattle-rich\" Euboea. On Cyprus, very early archaeological sites contain bull skulls that have been adapted for use as masks (see Bull (mythology)). Her familiar Homeric epithet \"Boôpis\", is always translated \"cow-eyed\". In this respect, Hera bears some resemblance to the Ancient Egyptian deity Hathor, a maternal goddess associated with cattle.\n\nHera bore several epithets in the mythological tradition, including:\n\nHera is known for her jealousy and even Zeus, who is known to fear nothing, feared her tantrums. Zeus fell in love with Hera but she refused his first marriage proposal. Zeus then preyed on her empathy for animals and other beings, created a thunderstorm and transforms himself into a little cuckoo. As a cuckoo, Zeus pretended to be in distress outside her window. Hera, feeling pity towards the bird brought it inside and held it to her breast to warm it. Zeus then transformed back into himself and took advantage of her. Hera, ashamed of being exploited, agreed to marriage with Zeus. All of nature burst into bloom for their wedding and many gifts were exchanged.\n\nZeus loved Hera, but he also loved Greece and often snuck down to Earth in disguise to marry and bear children with the mortals. He wanted many children to inherit his greatness and become great heroes and rulers of Greece. Hera's jealousy towards all of Zeus' lovers and children caused her to continuously tormented them and Zeus was powerless to stop his wife. Hera was always aware of Zeus' trickery and kept very close watch over him and his excursions to Earth.\n\nHera \"presided over the right arrangements of the marriage and is the archetype of the union in the marriage bed.\" However, she is not notable as a mother.\n\nHera is the stepmother and enemy of Heracles. The name Heracles means \"Glory of Hera\". When Alcmene was pregnant with Zeus' child Heracles, Hera tried to prevent the birth from occurring by having Eileithyia tie Alcmene's legs in knots. Her attempt was foiled when Galanthis frightened Eileithyia while she was tying Alcmene's legs and Heracles was born. Hera thus punishes Galanthis by turning her into a weasel.\n\nHera's wrath against Zeus' son continues and while Heracles is still an infant, Hera sends two serpents to kill him as he lay in his cot. Heracles throttles the snakes with his bare hands and was found by his nurse playing with their limp bodies as if they were a child's toy.\n\nLater she stirred up the Amazons against him when he was on one of his quests.\n\nOne account of the origin of the Milky Way is that Zeus had tricked Hera into nursing the infant Heracles: discovering who he was, she pulled him from her breast, and a spurt of her milk formed the smear across the sky that can be seen to this day. Unlike any Greeks, the Etruscans instead pictured a full-grown bearded Heracles at Hera's breast: this may refer to his adoption by her when he became an Immortal. He had previously wounded her severely in the breast.\n\nHera assigned Heracles to labor for King Eurystheus at Mycenae. She attempted to make almost each of Heracles' twelve labors more difficult.\n\nWhen he fought the Lernaean Hydra, she sent a crab to bite at his feet in the hopes of distracting him. When Heracles took the cattle of Geryon, he shot Hera in the right breast with a triple-barbed arrow: the wound was incurable and left her in constant pain, as Dione tells Aphrodite in the \"Iliad\", Book V. Afterwards, Hera sent a gadfly to bite the cattle, irritate them and scatter them. Hera then sent a flood which raised the water level of a river so much that Heracles could not ford the river with the cattle. He piled stones into the river to make the water shallower. When he finally reached the court of Eurystheus, the cattle were sacrificed to Hera.\n\nEurystheus also wanted to sacrifice the Cretan Bull to Hera. She refused the sacrifice because it reflected glory on Heracles. The bull was released and wandered to Marathon, becoming known as the Marathonian Bull.\n\nSome myths state that in the end, Heracles befriended Hera by saving her from Porphyrion, a giant who tried to rape her during the Gigantomachy, and that she even gave her daughter Hebe as his bride. Whatever myth-making served to account for an archaic representation of Heracles as \"Hera's man\" it was thought suitable for the builders of the Heraion at Paestum to depict the exploits of Heracles in bas-reliefs.\n\nWhen Hera discovered that Leto was pregnant and that Zeus was the father, she convinced the nature spirits to prevent Leto from giving birth on terra-firma, the mainland, or any island at sea. Poseidon gave pity to Leto and guided her to the floating island of Delos, which was neither mainland nor a real island where Leto was able to give birth to her children. As a gesture of gratitude, Delos was secured with four pillars. The island later became sacred to Apollo. Alternatively, Hera kidnapped Eileithyia, the goddess of childbirth, to prevent Leto from going into labor. The other gods bribed Hera with a beautiful necklace nobody could resist and she finally gave in.\n\nEither way, Artemis was born first and then assisted with the birth of Apollo. Some versions say Artemis helped her mother give birth to Apollo for nine days. Another variation states that Artemis was born one day before Apollo, on the island of Ortygia and that she helped Leto cross the sea to Delos the next day to give birth to Apollo.\n\nHera saw a lone thundercloud and raced down in an attempt to catch Zeus with a mistress. Zeus saw her coming and transformed his new bride Io into a little snow-white cow. However, Hera was not fooled and demanded that Zeus give her the heifer as a present. Zeus could not refuse his queen without drawing suspicion so he had to give her the beautiful heifer.\n\nOnce Io was given to Hera, she tied her to a tree and sent her servant Argus to keep Io separated from Zeus. Argus was a loyal servant to Hera and he has immense strength and one hundred eyes all over his body. It was not possible to go past Argus since he never closed more than half his eyes at any time. Zeus was afraid of Hera's wrath could not personally intervene, so to save Io, he commanded Hermes to kill Argus, which he does by lulling all one hundred eyes into eternal sleep. In Ovid's interpolation, when Hera learned of Argus' death, she took his eyes and placed them in the plumage of the peacock, her favorite animal, accounting for the eye pattern in its tail and making it the vainest of all animals. Hera, furious about Io being free and the death of Argus, sent a gadfly (Greek \"oistros\", compare oestrus) to sting Io as she wandered the earth. Eventually Io made it to Egypt, the Egyptians worshiped the snow-white heifer and named her the Egyptian goddess Isis. Hera permitted Zeus to change Io back into her human form, under the condition that he never look at her again. Io, the goddess-queen of Egypt, then bore Zeus' son as the next King.\n\nHera plays a substantial role in The Iliad, appearing in a number of books throughout the epic poem. In accordance with ancient Greek mythology, Hera's hatred towards the Trojans, which was started by Paris' decision that Aphrodite was the most beautiful goddess, is seen as through her support of the Greeks during the war. Throughout the epic Hera makes many attempts to thwart the Trojan army. In books 1 and 2, Hera declares that the Trojans must be destroyed. Hera persuades Athena to aid the Achaeans in battle and she agrees to assist with interfering on their behalf.\n\nIn book 5, Hera and Athena plot to harm Ares, who had been seen by Diomedes in assisting the Trojans. Diomedes called for his soldiers to fall back slowly. Hera, Ares' mother, saw Ares' interference and asked Zeus, Ares' father, for permission to drive Ares away from the battlefield. Hera encouraged Diomedes to attack Ares and he threw his spear at the god. Athena drove the spear into Ares' body, and he bellowed in pain and fled to Mt. Olympus, forcing the Trojans to fall back.\n\nIn book 8, Hera tries to persuade Poseidon to disobey Zeus and help the Achaean army. He refuses, saying he doesn’t want to go against Zeus. Determined to intervene in the war, Hera and Athena head to the battlefield. However, seeing the two flee, Zeus sent Iris to intercept them and make them return to Mt. Olympus or face grave consequences. After prolonged fighting, Hera sees Poseidon aiding the Greeks and giving them motivation to keep fighting.\n\nIn book 14 Hera devises a plan to deceive Zeus. Zeus set a decree that the gods were not allowed to interfere in the mortal war. Hear in on the side of the Achaeans so she plans a Deception of Zeus where she seduces him, with help from Aphrodite, and tricks him into a deep sleep, with the help of Hypnos, so that the Gods could interfere without the fear of Zeus.\n\nIn book 21, Hera continues her interference with the battle as she tells Hephaestus to prevent the river from harming Achilles. Hephaestus sets the battlefield ablaze, to which to river pleads with Hera that if he stops his attack, he will promise not to help the Trojans. Hephaestus stops his assault and Hera returns to the battlefield where the gods begin to fight amongst themselves.\n\nA prophecy stated that a son of the sea-nymph Thetis, with whom Zeus fell in love after gazing upon her in the oceans off the Greek coast, would become greater than his father. Possibly for this reasons, Thetis was betrothed to an elderly human king, Peleus son of Aeacus, either upon Zeus' orders, or because she wished to please Hera, who had raised her. All the gods and goddesses as well as various mortals were invited to the marriage of Peleus and Thetis (the eventual parents of Achilles) and brought many gifts. Only Eris, goddess of discord, was not invited and was stopped at the door by Hermes, on Zeus' order. She was annoyed at this, so she threw from the door a gift of her own: a golden apple inscribed with the word καλλίστῃ (kallistēi, \"To the fairest\"). Aphrodite, Hera, and Athena all claimed to be the fairest, and thus the rightful owner of the apple.\n\nThe goddesses quarreled bitterly over it, and none of the other gods would venture an opinion favoring one, for fear of earning the enmity of the other two. They chose to place the matter before Zeus, who, not wanting to favor one of the goddesses, put the choice into the hands of Paris, a Trojan prince. After bathing in the spring of Mount Ida where Troy was situated, they appeared before Paris to have him choose. The goddesses undressed before him, either at his request or for the sake of winning. Still, Paris could not decide, as all three were ideally beautiful, so they resorted to bribes. Hera offered Paris political power and control of all of Asia, while Athena offered wisdom, fame, and glory in battle, and Aphrodite offered the most beautiful mortal woman in the world as a wife, and he accordingly chose her. This woman was Helen, who was, unfortunately for Paris, already married to King Menelaus of Sparta. The other two goddesses were enraged by this and through Helen's abduction by Paris they brought about the Trojan War.\n\nEcho\nSemele and Dionysus\nLamia\nGerana\n\nCydippe\nTiresias\nChelone\nThe Golden Fleece\nThe Metamorphoses\nIxion\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "13208", "title": "Hera"}
